Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process Mining,
Predictive Process Monitoring, and Process-Aware Recommender Systems
ASJAD KHAN,University of Wollongong, Australia
ADITYA GHOSE,University of Wollongong, Australia
HOADAM,University of Wollongong, Australia
ARSAL SYED,University of Nevada, U.S.A
arXiv:2301.10398v2  [cs.OH]  23 Feb 2025
Process analytics approaches allow organizations to support the practice of Business Process Management and continuous improvement
by leveraging all process-related data to extract knowledge, improve process performance and support decision making across the
organization. Process execution data once collected will contain hidden insights and actionable knowledge that are of considerable
business value enabling firms to take a data-driven approach for identifying performance bottlenecks, reducing costs, extracting
insights and optimizing the utilization of available resources. Understanding the properties of ‘current deployed process’ (whose
execution trace is often available in these logs), is critical to understanding the variation across the process instances, root-causes of
inefficiencies and determining the areas for investing improvement efforts. In this survey we discuss various methods that allows
organizations to understand the behaviour of their processes, monitor currently running process instances, predict the future behavior
of those instances and provide better support for operational decision-making across the organization.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Process mining, Business Process Monitoring, Process Predictive analytics, process automation,
decision-support
ACM Reference Format:
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed. 2018. Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process
Mining, Predictive Process Monitoring, and Process-Aware Recommender Systems. 1, 1 (February 2018), 36 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/1122445.1122456
1 INTRODUCTION
Business processes are at the heart of every organization in the emerging knowledge economy. Process execution data
contains hidden insights and actionable knowledge of considerable business value. Process analytic approaches allow
organizations to support the practice of Business Process Management and continuous improvement by leveraging
all process-related data to identify performance bottlenecks, reducing costs, extracting insights and optimizing the
utilization of available resources. Over the past two decades, the process mining research community has primarily
focused on investigating problems such as (automated) process discovery, process conformance checking and process
enhancement. Within the broad umbrella of process mining, several methods have been proposed to provide support
Authors’ addresses: Asjad Khan, University of Wollongong, Northfields Ave, Wollongong, NSW, Australia; Aditya Ghose, University of Wollongong,
Northfields Ave, Wollongong, NSW, Australia; Hoa Dam, University of Wollongong, Northfields Ave, Wollongong, NSW, Australia, asjad@outlook.com;
Arsal Syed, University of Nevada, 1664 N Virginia St, Reno, Las Vegas, Nevada, U.S.A, syeda3@unlv.nevada.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
©2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Manuscript submitted to ACM
1
2
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed
during the process redesign and process analysis/diagnosis phases of the BPM life-cycle. e.g constructing simulation
models from process logs, performing organizational or social-network mining, case outcome predictions and so on
[140]. These methods allow organizations to leverage process execution logs to answer questions like; Does the process
behave as expected? or Are there any bottlenecks that negatively impact process performance? and Do the logged instances
conform to applicable laws and regulations? [41]. While process mining topics like discovery, conformance checking, and
enhancement continue to be active areas of research, several newer methods have grown in prominence that leverage a
much more diverse range of data sources and offer a much more sophisticated set of capabilities.
Process analytics allows organizations to support the practice of Business Process Management by leveraging all
process-related data to extract knowledge, improve process performance and support managerial-decision making
across the organization[39]. Process analytics involves a sophisticated layer of data analytics built over the traditional
notion of process mining. While process mining addresses the problem of reverse engineering process designs from
process execution data (process logs), process analytics extends the scope and addresses the more general problem
of leveraging data generated by, or associated with, process execution to obtain actionable insights about business
processes. Process analytics leverages a range of data, including, but not limited to process logs, event logs, provisioning
logs, decision logs and process context. Process analytics can be used to obtain predictive insights (how will a given
process work out?), diagnostic insights (why did a process generate a given outcome?) as well as prescriptive insights
(what should be done next in a process?). Process data can for example be used to prescribe what resources should be
allocated to process tasks, or predict whether a process will achieve its goals.
Process analytics enables firms to take a data-driven approach for identifying performance bottlenecks, reducing
costs, extracting insights and optimizing the utilization of available resources.It encompasses methods, tools and
techniques that allow firms to understand the behaviour of their processes, monitor currently running process instances,
predict the future behaviour of those instances and provide better support for operational decision-making across
the organization [13]. Process analytics can also be viewed as an organizational capability that enables firms to stay
competitive by better understanding their business processes and identifying areas of improvement. Some examples of
these capabilities include:
• Mining the logs of historical (completed) traces to better understand the process behaviour, retrospectively.
• methodstoanalyseprocessesthroughdatatogaininsightsaboutperformancebottlenecksandidentifyingtheroot
causes of undesired process behaviour/outcomes to support evidence-based process analysis and improvement
• Understanding resource behaviour and optimizing the utilization of available resources for future instances.
• Supportingoperational decision-making across the organization during process execution by for example, making
process behaviour forecasts for running cases.
• Providing decision support to knowledge workers involved in the execution of knowledge-intensive, unstructured
or semi-structured processes.
• Supporting the practice of risk management by assisting in early identification and possible mitigation of
undesired effects.
In this work, we aim to cover process analytic techniques that have received relatively less attention from the research
communityand therefore offer a fertile ground for exploration and contributions. We can broadly classify them into three
major themes: Mining Process Behaviour, Predictive Process Monitoring, and Process Decision Support. In mining process
behaviour, we focus on techniques that can help us analyze historical (completed) traces to better understand the process
behaviour, retrospectively [140]. Process Mining methods are used for post-mortem analysis of completed business
Manuscript submitted to ACM
3
Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process Mining, Predictive Process Monitoring, and
Process-Aware Recommender Systems
processes to assist with process improvement and redesign efforts. They can help in optimizing process performance
by mining process behaviour, identifying bottlenecks (or various sources of inefficiencies and frequent defects), and
understanding their root causes. Predictive Process Monitoring methods on the other hand aim at analyzing execution
data (e.g. event logs) of a business process at run-time to forecast the future state of the executions of a business
process [137]. These methods are an effective decision support tool for continuously monitoring performance of process
instances and reducing the overall risk associated with negative outcomes. Lastly, Assisting organizations in operational
decision support remains one of the major goals of process analytics and process management systems. We discuss the
topic of decision support, specifically in the context of: (i) supporting knowledge-intensive processes by recommending
the best alternative given a decision-making point during process execution. (ii) providing intelligent assistance for
resource allocation and (iii) reducing risks associated with operational and strategic decisions for processes operating
in dynamic environments. Overall, We see these capabilities and themes in combination represent an important area
for further exploration and research.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 reviews basic concepts of BPM, and discusses the relation
ship between Process Analytics and Business Process Management. Section 3 describes the search protocol used for
conducting the systematic literature review. Section 4 discusses methods for understanding process behaviour using
logs of historical (completed) traces. Section 5 surveys the selected studies related to predictive process monitoring
methods and provides a taxonomy to classify them. In Section 6, we investigate the theme of decision support in the
context of structured, unstructured and semi-structured knowledge intensive processes.
2 PRELIMINARY CONCEPTS
Business Process Management:
Business Process Management (BPM) follows a paradigm of “process thinking” where we take a process-centered
approach towards understanding and improving business processes [151]. Business processes are key instruments in
organizing activities whose outcome is a product or a service [34] Processes are described by ‘Events, activities and
decisions involving multiple actors and resources, that collectively lead to an outcome that is of value to an organisation or
its customers’ [41]. BPM is defined as:"a body of principles, methods and tools to design, analyse, execute and monitor
business processes, with the aim of improving their performance." Effective management of enterprise-wide processes
enables organizations to control the process outcomes and focus their efforts on identifying and improving areas
of high impact. BPM is concerned with management, compliance, and the redesign of business processes. It aims at
bringing predictability, transparency and consistency to business operations [41]. BPM practice is supported by various
modeling tools and analysis methods that have been proposed over the years. Such methods and tools enable continuous
performance improvement by optimally allocating scarce resources and tracing performance bottlenecks as possible
examples.
Process Management Systems: Formerly known as workflow management systems, Process Management Systems
(PMS) are designed to facilitate the operations of an organization by supporting all the phases in the business process
life cycle (e.g via managing the process routing and allocation of resources) [34]. In doing so, a PMS also records event
data representing the execution trace of various deployed processes. Currently, there exist various types of Business
Process Management systems that can be distinguished based on degree of support’ they provide and ‘orientation on
process data’ [41]. Examples include groupware systems, ad-hoc workflow systems, production workflow systems and
case handling systems [107].
Manuscript submitted to ACM
4
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed
Process Data
Processes deployed inside and across an enterprise, when executed can leave an operational data footprint in the form
of an event logs, which if analyzed can be a valuable source of insights to support the management and improvement of
business processes. This Process execution data can transformed into an event log describing the sequence of activities
that were performed, along with the resources involved in the execution. Each entry of the process execution log(also
known as event logs) represents an event, which records the occurrence of an activity at a particular point in time
and belongs to precisely one case (case represents a unique process instance). Events can be characterised by multiple
descriptors (attributes), including an event (or activity name), a unique case identifier (e.g case ID), a timestamp and
optionally details of resource responsible for executing the task of the process instance. An event refers to an activity
(or a step) in the process and belongs to a process instance or a case [41][156]. The sequence of ordered events within a
case form a trace. We use the following definition to define an event:
Definition [142]: An event 𝑒 is tuple 𝑒 = (𝑐,𝑎,𝑡,𝑟) ∈ Ucase × Uact × Utime × Ures referring to case𝑐, activity a,
timestamp𝑡, and resource𝑟 of event e. An event log𝐿 is a multiset of events, i.e.,𝐿 ∈ B (Ucase × Uact × Utime × Ures ).
Apart from event logs (which record sequential events representing activities in a case instance) organizations can
leverage a diverse set of heterogeneous data sources to gain a holistic view of all process-related aspects. Various
sources of structured and unstructured process-related execution data are available but often times are scattered across
several systems. Examples include:
• Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
• Contextual data e.g from real-time IOT sensors
• Webdata. e.g Social Media Sentiment
• Provisioning Logs and decision logs
• Unstructured and Semi-Structured data
BPM lifecycle:
Heiskanen et al. [65] have described the BPM lifecycle as "The entry point to the cycle is the design and analysis phase,
where the business processes are identified and provided with a formal representation. Newly created models and models
from past iterations are verified and validated against current process requirements. In the configuration phase, the systems
to use are selected, and the business processes identified before are implemented, tested, and deployed. During the enactment
phase, the processes are operated, and the process execution is monitored and maintained. The resulting execution data is
processed by the techniques of the evaluation phase, for example process mining. Using the knowledge gained from one
iteration, the next iteration can be started by redesigning the business processes." We briefly describe the steps below:
• Process Identification/(Re)design: In process identification, after requirement analysis, process models are
designed using a suitable modeling language. Existing models can be further refined/improved based on insights
gathered in the previous cycle.
• Process Analysis/diagnosis: In this step, process logs are typically analysed to diagnose problems and identify
areas of potential improvement. Process Discovery methods are also useful here, allowing the analyst to reverse
engineer the models from recorded process execution logs [33].
• ProcessImplementation:InProcessimplementation(alsoknownasprocessenactment),aprocessmanagement
engine is sometimes used to support the process enactment by instantiating a process instance where tasks
Manuscript submitted to ACM
5
Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process Mining, Predictive Process Monitoring, and
Process-Aware Recommender Systems
are assigned to the relevant resources for execution. A PMS can also manage process routing(control-flow) by
considering which tasks are enabled for execution [13].
• Process Monitoring and Controlling: Organizational process are monitored by the various process support
and management tools while executed tasks are tracked and recorded to generate execution traces for later
analysis.
Business Process Paradigms:
It is useful to characterise various types of processes based on the degree of structuring and predictability they
exhibit. Process paradigms describe work activities that a process management (or process-support) system can handle
[13]. Traditional process management systems have provided support for modeling, monitoring and management of
structured processes. However, business processes often contain reusable patterns with elements of unpredictable
nature, requiring a certain degree of flexibility. Ciccio et al. [34] have described the spectrum of process management as
follows:
• Structured processes: Structured processes represent predictable routine work (e.g administrative processes).
They have a predefined schema (defined apriori in a process model) where process logic and ordering of activities,
their dependencies and allocation of resources is known in advance.
• Structured processes with ad-hoc exceptions: They allow a certain degree of flexibility as unanticipated
exceptions can cause deviations during the execution of a process instance. Some of these deviations can also be
anticipated in advance and incorporated into the process design via exception handlers.
• Unstructured processes with predefined segments: Here structured process fragments can be pre-defined
on a per-case basis(based on policies and regulations) but overall process logic cannot be specified in advance.
• Loosely structured processes: Loosely structured processes require adaptation strategies, as the ordering
of activities is hard to anticipate in advance, making the overall process structure less rigid. Here constraints
(described by policies and business rules) are defined ahead of time to prohibit undesirable behaviour.
• Unstructured processes: Unstructured processes are often knowledge-centric (dependent on human judgement
and expertise) and represent complex, non-routine business process. They are collaborative in nature, driven by
rules and dynamic events where the structure of a process evolves based on the operational context.
Readers can refer to [75] [63] [115] for a more detailed discussion on the process spectrum.
3 RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
We identified and classified the most relevant process analytics studies by conducting a systematic literature review (SLR)
according to the scientifically rigorous guidelines described in [80]. First, we formulated a list of research questions
representing our research goals. Next, guided by these questions, we describe the relevant search strings used for
querying a database of academic papers. We then applied inclusion/exclusion criteria to the retrieved studies and
filtered out the irrelevant ones. Finally we divided all relevant studies into primary and subsumed ones based on their
contribution.
3.1 Research Questions
Our paper aims to conduct a systematic literature review by analysing research studies related to process analytics. Our
goal is to understand the recent developments in the field of process analytics by examining the following research
questions:
Manuscript submitted to ACM
6
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed
RQ1 What is the body of recent and relevant academic publications within the field of business process analytics?
RQ2 What family of methods exists for diagnostic analytics that lets us mine relevant process data in a retrospective
(post-mortem) fashion?
RQ3 What aspects of business processes can be predicted?
RQ4 What are some of the state-of-art methods for predictive monitoring tasks?
RQ5 What role can prescriptive process analytic methods play in automating or supporting decision making in the
context of business process execution?
RQ6 How do we characterise these findings in a taxonomy?
RQ7 What should be the future research focus of BPM and process analytics?
RQ1 is the core question that identities existing methods to support the practice of business process management. It
allows us to identify a set of classification criteria. Given the richness of the process analytics literature, this overarching
question is then decomposed into subsequent research questions to have a well-delimited and manageable scope. RQ2
aims to identify methods that attempt to understand the process behaviour using offline data in order to diagnose
possible performance problems and identify areas of potential improvements. Given the vast number of publications in
the broader field of process mining, we focus on contemporary topics that have not been examined in great detail so far.
RQ3 and RQ4 investigate aspects of business processes that can be predicted by means of machine learning techniques
(also known as business process monitoring techniques). RQ5 explores prescriptive methods with the potential of
providing decision support both at strategic and operational level.
We categorize our findings based on input data required, type of algorithm employed, validation method, and tool
support. (Note to self: The strategy for taxonomy isnt finalized yet).
3.2 Study Retrieval
Keeping the research goals in mind, and following the guidance given in [80] we define the search string. We drive a set
of relevant keywords from our subject matter expertise:
“business process” — generic term for retrieving most process analytics papers.
“mining”- Here a relevant study must take as input a event dataset and proposes a technique for analysing,
extracting actionable knowledge.
“diagnostic” — diagnostic methods perform post-mortem analysis of process data in an attempt to understand
what happened in the past and to analyse the root causes of performance issues.
“monitoring“ — monitoring methods are concerned with run-time predictions of process outcomes.
“prediction” — a relevant study that estimates or predicts various aspects/properties of a business process.
“prescriptive"- studies that are concerned with action recommendations
“decision-support"- Methods that provide decision support for achieving process goals.
“recommendations"- Methods that provide recommendations for decision support.
Based on these selected keywords and criteria, we constructed the following search phrases:
• “process mining AND performance improvement”
• “process mining AND resource management”
• “business process prediction”
• “predictive business process monitoring”
• “prescriptive process analytics AND decision Support”
Manuscript submitted to ACM
7
Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process Mining, Predictive Process Monitoring, and
Process-Aware Recommender Systems
• “prescriptive process analytics”
• “process recommendations AND decision-support”
• “decision support AND process analytics”
• “decision support AND knowledge-intensive processes”
3.3 Study Selection
We then picked the Google Scholar database [61] as our primary search engine for retrieving relevant studies based on
our final search strings. We double-checked the retrieved studies with six other literature search sources, including
SpringerLink, Scopus, IEEE Xplore, ScienceDirect and ACM Digital Library. These major database electronic literature
databases cover the scientific publications within the field of computer science. After search was conducted(in August
2020), it returned more than 5000 papers.
Exclusion criteria: Non-English and Duplicate studies (appearing in multiple databases) were removed. Short Papers
with page length 6 and workshop papers were also excluded. Studies which propose method whose input is not process
data are also excluded. Lastly, studies where the main contribution of the paper is a case study or a tool implementation
instead of novel model with proper evaluation are excluded.
Inclusion criteria: Based on the meta-data (titles, abstract) of remaining papers, we then filtered studies that appeared
out of scope based on inclusion criteria(as suggested by [106] [52]).
IN1: We picked the study only if: (i) it is concerned with analysis and mining process data. (ii) proposes techniques
for predictive monitoring of processes. (iii) investigates methods related to prescriptive analytics and decision support in
the context of structured, unstructured and knowledge-intensive business processes.
IN2: Study is published in 2011 and later were all included, even if they had fewer than 5 citations. However, for
papers published before 2011 we used the snowballing technique.
IN3: The study clearly defined research context, goals and proposes a novel method that has been properly evaluated
with sound experiments.
IN4: The study is peer-reviewed and published in a reputable venue.
For final inclusion, a given study must meet the above inclusion criteria. We applied the inclusion criteria IN2 by
configuring the search engine’s filter settings. For applying the IN1 and IN3 criterion, was assessed by reading title,
abstract and skimming the relevant sections of the paper. After filtering the search results by applying inclusion and
exclusion criteria, we identified primary and subsumed studies. Primary studies constitute an original contribution to
the field and subsumed are ones that do not substantially improvement with respect to the original contribution. The
application of the exclusion criteria resulted in 734 relevant studies out of 1319 works selected in the previous step.
3.4 Taxonomy
We categorize the selected works using different dimensions specifying the typology of the existing methods and their
characteristics.
In particular, each study can be decomposed and organized along the following dimensions:- Input data- Outcome- Process perspective (control flow, resources, data)- Family of algorithms(the main algorithm used in the study)
Manuscript submitted to ACM
8
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed
Fig. 1. Publications dates of included literature- Evaluation data (real-life or artificial logs) and application domain (e.g., insurance, banking, healthcare)- Implementation (standalone or plug-in, and tool accessibility)
Lastly, we also observed that currently, many of the same mining problems are being studied under different names,
and proposed methods are being evaluated in an ad-hoc manner with no common experimental setups or evaluation
measures.
4 MINING PROCESS BEHAVIOUR
In a given enterprise, business processes, when executed often leave an operational data footprint in the form of
logs, documentation, and various data artifacts containing insights and knowledge that are of considerable business
value. Process mining techniques can leverage this execution data to mine actionable knowledge, discover insights
about performance bottlenecks, frequent defects, their root causes and other sources of inefficiencies. This allows
organizations to gain behaviour visibility in order to optimize process performance and support both operational and
managerial decision-making [13] [39]. Enterprises adopt process mining tools that typically support business process
improvement by offering techniques for process automation, auditing and compliance checking, and recently digital
transformation [76].
Traditional process mining techniques cover various process-related perspectives. e.g control-flow perspective,
organizational perspective, case perspective and time perspective. In behaviour analysis, we start by understanding the
current ‘as is’ state of processes. Here process discovery techniques can for example by leveraged event data to for
example reveal (in terms of an abstract process model) the common workflows used by an enterprise for executing
various types of functionality. i.e. we describe how process activities currently are being performed by mining the
process model from event log. The control-flow model can then be extended with other perspectives to obtain a holistic
view covering all process-related aspects and gain a complete understanding of current process behaviour. The insights
and knowledge gained during this process can be used for the redesigning processes and offers a means for improving
process performance such that it leads to positive (value-adding) process outcomes [160].
Manuscript submitted to ACM
9
Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process Mining, Predictive Process Monitoring, and
Process-Aware Recommender Systems
Fig. 2. Proposed Taxonomy
Behaviour analysis also aims to provide an analytical support layer that addresses the information needs of process
field analysts [81]. Such support involves combining multiple analytic techniques to: (i) become familiar with the
dataset at hand in order to answer a particular question (ii) obtain performance statistical summaries(e.g wait times,
historical cycle times) using aggregation, correlation and evaluation techniques (iii) uncovering insights, patterns
and discovery of hidden relationships among various organizational elements/artifacts [62]. During the ’exploratory
data analysis’ phase, process analysts often engage in techniques like deductive (hypothesis-based) and inductive
(pattern-based) reasoning to formulate and to answer one or more questions [62]. Traditional process mining and
discovery algorithms [81] for generating procedural models (like Petri nets, causal nets, BPMN models process trees)
represent the control-flow of the process and can give a big picture view of existing deployed business process models.
Visualizing the control-flow or process models through process discovery is a good starting point for process analysts to
perform further analysis by asking questions in an iterative manner [140]. The initial analysis then guides the process
mining activities as information needs emerge during familiarization and discovery phase [140][81]. In [81] Muller et al.
have investigated challenges faced by process analysts in practice. According to their findings, analysts spend significant
time investigating the case perspective (which focuses on properties of cases) and organizational perspective(which
Manuscript submitted to ACM
10
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed
focuses on organizational resources). In [141] Van der Aalst has also shared some lessons learned after conducting
practical real world process mining projects.
Process mining algorithm’s performance is traditionally measured by how well it achieves pareto-optimality of the
mined model in terms of various properties such as fitness and precision with respect to the available event log. The
algorithm has an additional goal of achieving generalization on future process instances. In many practical settings, the
target search space of models is quite large for an exhaustive search; therefore, process mining algorithms, enforce a
specific representational bias to to make a trade-off (e.g. between higher fitness and lower precision). In many real-world
settings, process behaviour is not completely captured or available for mining in the event logs [6] as these logs are
often noisy and incomplete. Process discovery algorithms when applied to real-world complex event logs often produce
either noisy or incomprehensible models that either poorly fit the event log (low fitness) or over-generalize it (low
precision or low generalization) [6].
Process mining techniques discussed in this section along with classic methods like conformance checking and
process enhancement, collectively help us construct an enriched process model through the offline analysis of all
available process-related data. This enriched process model provides us with a holistic process view, covering all relevant
aspects of the process at hand and is helpful for: (a) supporting managerial decision-making and generating insights
about performance improvement (b) constructing a simulation model which captures the on-ground reality And; (c)
Performing ”what-if” analysis using the simulated model. e.g., if I allocate a given resource set to the next task, what would
the predicted completion time for the process instance be?. Next, we will focus on reviewing process mining techniques
aimed at behaviour analysis of all the available structured and unstructured process-related data, in order to:
• Assist business analysts in gaining visibility and understanding, of process behaviour captured in process
execution logs and other process-related data by Answer a wide range of process-related questions.
• Uncover patterns, extract insights and discovering hidden relationships among various organizational ele
ments/artifacts.
• Support managerial decision-making by mining actionable knowledge and insights related to performance
bottle-necks, optimal resource allocation and uncovering root-causes that lead to undesired process outcomes.
4.1 Process Performance Mining
Prior to process design, organizations often engage in an exercise of strategic planning by using balanced scorecards
where the mission and strategy of an organization [58] are translated into a set of performance measures (also
known as KPIs). Such performance measures, can help organization keep track of progress towards the specific defined
organizational goals. Moreover, for organizations implementing business process management, organizational objectives
are used to formulate process performance measures,characterized bymetrics like per-instance cost, cycle time efficiency
(CTE), resource utilization, quality of service and so on [160]. Several performance measurement systems exist, and
appropriate ones can be picked depending on the organizational objectives or strategic success factors [151]. Devil’s
quadrangle can for example, measures dimensions such as process cost, quality (e.g. visiting frequencies, error rates) and
cycle time (also known as throughput time)[73]. Jansen-Vullers et. al [73] have proposed a framework for quantifying
the impact of best practices and discuss different dimensions for performance measurement. Several domain-specific
performance reference models also exist. e.g Supply Chain Operations reference model, IT infrastructure Library (ITIL)
etc.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process Mining, Predictive Process Monitoring, and
Process-Aware Recommender Systems
11
Performance analysis techniques allow us to extract, analyze and enhance existing process models by identifying
performance improvement areas and mining KPI values using the available process logs. Early identification of large
deviations between the planned and actual KPI values allows organisations to take corrective actions to achieve the
desired goals. Performance analysis techniques include Bottleneck Analysis (where we identify activity, resource and
waiting bottlenecks), workload and demand analysis (where we analyze resource usage to identify under-utilized or over
utilized resources), rework analysis (where we identify errors or defects) and over-processing analysis. Organizations
can leverage these techniques to identify a range of issues related time, costs and quality based on event log data. These
insights can later be used in the process redesign phase for improving or enhancing the apriori process model. We note
that process performance analysis has several titles in the literature. e.g Business Process perspective, Performance
perspective, Process Performance Management etc [69] [160].
Performance analysis techniques can be divided into Qualitative or Quantitative analysis [41]. In Qualitative Process
Analysis, we can perform Value-Added Analysis(which aims at identifying waste) and Root Cause Analysis(e.g cause
effect analysis and why–why analysis). Here we measure process performance using metrics like per-instance cost,
cycle time efficiency (CTE), resource utilization, quality of service, and so on [160]. Quantitative process analysis is
based on historical process execution data or simulation models and involves using techniques like flow analysis,
queuing theory and process simulation [41]. Process simulation is a popular technique for quantitative analysis of process
models where synthetic data based on hypothetical instances is used to estimate cycle times, average waiting times and
average resource utilization. Similarly, flow analysis provides a set of techniques that utilize activity performance data
to estimate the process’s overall performance but ignores the resources utilization aspect from the analysis [41].
Business process monitoring deals with event analysis and support of real-time executions of a given process. It aims
to understand the present process performance by presenting a real-time picture of key performance indicators(often
using dashboards) such as mean execution time, resource utilization or error rate etc.[42]. Process monitoring tools help
determine how well business processes under consideration are aligned with the goals of an organizations. They enable
continuous, real-time monitoring of processes based on performance-related KPI values of a given process instance
to track various business objectives. Process monitoring tools like performance dashboards can monitor the actual
KPI values(e.g the distribution of cycles times, visualize the activities and execution patterns, and total duration) of a
business process[133]. Several software vendors offer various performance analysis features where we can find the
causes of these deviations(when they happen) and project performance analysis results onto process models to show
bottlenecks, service performance levels, throughput times, and frequencies [69].
4.2 Causal Process Mining
To inform decision making under uncertainty, Businesses often draw on previous experience and recorded data to
understand the potential downstream effects of certain specific decisions and actions. Historically, to determine the
effect of a given intervention on a particular process would require either guesswork or launching numerous A/B tests,
which can be costly and time consuming [83]. Theory of causality provides a better alternative for potential downstream
effects of decisions that are being considered [108]. Causal process mining seeks to use the process execution logs
to discover and quantify cause-effect relations. Causal Process Mining can answer the fundamental question: What
changes, if implemented, will cause an improvement to the process?. Existing process discovery techniques allow us to
discover correlation but not causation. In causal analysis we try to develop an understanding that goes beyond the
control-flow perspective. We are interested in understanding the outcomes(desired or undesired effects) associated with
Manuscript submitted to ACM
12
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed
particular action(s) (interventions) taken during the course of process execution. There has been much recent interest
in studying Causal analysis and Causal reasoning in the data science and machine learning research communities.
Leveraging process data would allows us to infer future process state based on what happened in the past and use
that evidence to establish causality. However, pinning down causal effects rigorously is challenging. We briefly cover
some of the recent contributions to process analytics in this section. Koorn et. al. [84] have proposed a method that
uses statistical tests to discover action-response-effect patterns. Their method can identify causal relations between
responses (interventions) and effects for certain pre-defined sub-populations. This can support the decision making
processes by giving insights into how certain actions lead to desired outcomes (e.g improved performance). In [94]
Qafari et. al. showed that root cause analysis using structural equation modeling is useful for testing if a predetermined
causal relation (identified earlier by a process analyst) holds. Bozorgi et. al. [29] proposed an approach that extracts
recommendation rules from event logs. Causal effect can then be assessed and rules with highest incremental effect
(uplift) can be used as recommendations in the form of interventions that can influence process outcomes positively.
Their framework also computes a cost-benefit model of a particular intervention, identifying particular cases to which
it is applicable (case-level recommendations). Agarwal et. al [103] take a similar approach for structural causal model
discovery and performing counterfactual reasoning. Discovering cause-effect relationships in event data is useful for
root cause analayis of process performance issues but remains a challenging open problem. Hompes et. al. [68] propose
a method which uses Granger causality to generate a graph of causal factors explaining factors (or their combinations)
that may affect process performance.
Causal Analysis techniques has also been used to understand process deviation, explain predictions and make
recommendations. We will discuss these techniques in next sections.
4.3 Deviance Mining
Business process variant (also known as deviance analysis or drift detection) refers to process instances that maybe
deviate from the desired course of execution, resulting in an unexpected or unplanned outcome. Variations may occur
due to contextual/environmental factors, human factors or because of explicit decisions made by process participants.
In a given process log, process variants are a subset of instances that violate the behavior prescribed by the model and
can distinguished based on a certain characteristics they are correlated with. e.g. representing violation compliance
rules or missing set performance targets. In deviance mining, we are interested in identifying various variants of the
processes that may exist and diagnosing the root-causes of process variations by analyzing or comparing two or more
event logs. i.e Given a set of event logs of two or more process variants, how can we identify and explain the differences
among these variants? [135]. Understanding the factors leading to variation can help managers make better decisions
and improve overall process performance.
Several methods havebeen proposed in the last decade to analyze the execution logs to identify and explain differences
between two or more process variants. One class of techniques uses frequent pattern mining which typically takes as
input two event logs (corresponding to two variants of a process) and produces as output a list of differences (with
respect to established performance objectives). Machine Learning techniques on the other hand can classify instances as
“normal” or “deviant” when trained with labelled examples. In [105] Nguyen et al. have surveyed sequence classification
and mining techniques. They divide the techniques into those based on frequent pattern mining and rest based on
discriminative pattern mining. They also provide benchmark comparisons of representative techniques using various
real-life event logs. Similarly, Taymouri et al. [135] have tried to present a unified view of variant analysis techniques by
surveying and classifying existing methods based on data, type of algorithms and analysis performed. Several methods
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process Mining, Predictive Process Monitoring, and
Process-Aware Recommender Systems
13
rely on identifying frequent patterns, while others use generative approaches to discover and compare models of
process variants. They have categorized process variant analysis outcomes as Rule-based, model based or descriptive
(representing discrepancies and behavior of the different process variants. Modeling and management of process
variants is another important challenge that contemporary BPM tools do not adequately support [113]. Existing tools
require that variants be specified in separate process models or ’expressed in terms of conditional branches within the
same process model’.
4.4 Decision Mining
Operational Decision-making associated with frequently executed processes and cases can significantly impact process
outcomes. Traditionally, a business process model specifies activities within which the decision-making occurs. Decision
logic can define the specific logic used to make individual decisions, such as business rules or executable analytic
models. Decision modelling can represent complex, multi-criteria business rules and thus provides another perspective,
creating a bridge between business process models and decision logic models [51].
Decision Model and Notation (DMN) is a modeling notation for decisions, published by OMG and allows for decoupling
between decisions and control flow logic [99]. It provides an understandable symbolic representation of operational
decisions and supports supports decision management, and business rules specification [82].
Decision mining aims at mining the Decision model along with along with associated decision logic. The Decision
model will define the decisions to be made in tasks (defined by the process model), their interrelationships, and their
requirements for decision logic. Process execution data, depicting underlying rules (governing the choices) can be mined
for frequently made decisions within an organization. However, decision mining is challenging due to several factors
(e.g incompleteness of available data). Decisions are often dependent on personal expertise and contextual factors,
information that may not be present in event logs. Decision mining techniques can identify and derive decision rules
from relationships between process context, path decisions, and process outcomes. Several techniques proposed in the
literature has tried to tackle the problem of decision mining partially. In mannhardt et al. [95] propose a decision-tree
based learning method to discover overlapping decision rules from event data. Similar to decision mining, Batoulis et.
al. [9] have proposed a method for extracting decision logic from process models. The paper explains a semi-automatic
approach where execution logs are not required and decision points can be replaced by generating a dedicated decision
model, allowing decision logic to modeled separately from process logic. Rozinat et. al. [116] propose a method for
decision point analysis that determines how data attribute values(or data dependencies) affect the routing of a case.
Their technique can identify decision points in Petri net models and has been implemented as a ProM Plug-in. Leoni et.
al [31] extended the technique and proposed a general-purpose method for discovering Branching Conditions (where
atoms are equalities or inequalities consisting of multiple variables and arithmetic operators). Similarly, Bazhenova et.
al. [11] use decision tree classification to derive of DMN based decision models. Their techniques are able to extract
not only control flow decisions but data decisions and dependencies. Overall, a comprehensive set of methods and
frameworks is required that assist orgnaizations with dynamic management of decisions via analyzing, modelling and
improvement efforts. Such methods should be able to leverage available process data and mine Decision model along
with along with decision logic and dependencies between decisions and data elements .
4.5 Resource Behaviour Analysis
Human resources often take the role of knowledge workers and play a major role in modern organizations where
processes are increasingly complex have knowledge-intensive nature [34]. In such knowledge-intensive scenarios,
Manuscript submitted to ACM
14
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed
Resources (especially human resources) play a critical role in deciding the overall process outcomes. Event logs contain
rich information about the task, resource and process outcome and can be leveraged to optimally realize the process
goals [110]. Resource analysis (also known as organizational or resource mining/perspective) aims at analyzing event
logs for extracting insights about organizational resources, evaluate resource performance and understand past resource
allocation decisions in order to find areas of improvement [109]. Over the past decade, various resource analysis
techniques have been proposed to tackle problems like organizational structure discovery, classification of users in
roles, discovery of organizational models, social network analysis (SNA), resource allocation, analysis of information
flows between organizational entities and role mining [159] [17] [128][110].
Optimal allocation of resources to process tasks can significantly impact the overall process performance. Comparing
and tracking the productivity of human resources is a challenging problem due to biases and lack of objectivity.
Sindhgatta et al. [127] propose a method that uses process execution logs to identify resource allocations decisions
which result in good outcomes(measured in terms of quality of service). In a similar work, Sindhgatta et al. [126]
investigate the variation in resource efficiencies with varying case attributes and show that process outcomes are
dependent on various contextual factors like complexity of work, task priority and capabilities(expertise) of the resources
involved.
Accurately measuring resource behaviour allows us to effectively dispatching and suggest staffing policies that meet
the contractual service levels (quality) of the service system and the business process. Huang et. al. [70] consider the
problem of measuring resource behaviour from different perspectives such as preference, availability, competence and
cooperation. Similarly, several methods for extracting useful knowledge about resource performance from event logs
have been proposed in the literature. Pika et al. [109] propose a technique based on data envelopment analysis for
analysing resource productivity using event logs. This technique is often used to measure the efficiency of companies.
Linh ly et. al. [92] study the problem of mining staff assignment rules from event-based data using an organisational
model. Similarly, Senderovich et. al. [124] explore mining of resource scheduling protocols from recorded event data.
Related to the problem of resource assignment and allocation Cabanillas et. al. [18] have studied the challenge of
resource ranking and prioritization.
The success of process outcomes also depends on resources interaction. Social collaboration patterns between human
resources can significantly impact process outcomes as optimal cooperative resource behaviour leads to enhanced service
quality and process performance. Improving process performance by analyzing relationships and mining collaboration
patterns between organizational entities is one of the key goals of resource analysis. It is based on the premise that
process output not only depends on capability but compatibility as well. Social network analysis [144] is one approach
for understanding organizational structure and analyze relationships between originators involved in processes. Such
an analysis is useful for many reasons such as improving handover relations, improving resource compatibility etc.
In [86] Kumar et al. propose a modeling technique that captures the compatibility between resources at the time of
task assignment. Schonig et. al. [123] proposed an approach to extract declarative process models. Their technique
allows modelling of organizational relations using rule templates that can be represented in textual Declarative Process
Intermediate Language (DPIL).
RBAC (Role based access control) is used to manage resources in workflow area and is a useful model for managing
resources[85]. Event logs can be used to to mine role based access control (RBAC) models, identifying the privileges or
authorization of resources [10] [17]. Roles refer to the assignment of organizational agents to job functions within an
organization. Discovering an optimal set of roles remains a useful problem to investigate. Vaidya et. al. [138] define the
perform as determining a role-based access control (RBAC) configuration and analyze its theoretical bounds. Similarly,
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process Mining, Predictive Process Monitoring, and
Process-Aware Recommender Systems
15
frank et. al. [53] propose a probabilistic solution to learn the RBAC configuration and show how it generalizes well to
new system users for a diverse range of data.
4.6 Distributed Privacy-Preserving Mining
Modern organizations routinely deploy process analytics, including process discovery techniques on their process
data, both to gain insight into the reality of their operational processes and also to identify process improvement
opportunities [6]. Process analytics techniques such as process discovery play an important role in mining event data
and providing organizations with insights about the behaviour of their deployed processes. However, in many practical
settings, process log data is often geographically dispersed, may contain information that may be deemed sensitive and
may be subject to compliance obligations that prevent this data from being transmitted to sites distinct to the site where
the data was generated. Traditional process mining techniques operate by assuming that all relevant available process
data is available in a single repository. However, anonymising, giving control access and safely transferring sensitive
data across organization/site boundaries while preserving priacy guarantees is non-trivial. However, in many practical
settings, process log data is geographically dispersed and can contain information that may be deemed sensitive. A
classical example of a privacy-preserving process mining problem of the first type is from the field of medical research
involving impediments to data migration. Consider the case that a number of different hospitals wish to jointly mine
their process logs for the purpose of medical research, but are faced with regulatory and legislative compliance hurdles
that prevent clinical process histories being shared across health jurisdictions (hospitals, health districts, national
boundaries etc.). Hospitals are therefore restricted from ever pooling their data or revealing it to each other leading
to small dataset available for knowledge extraction. This negatively impacts the confidence with which clinicians
might deploy the results thus obtained. Our inability to migrate clinical process data also implies that we miss out
on the opportunities for extracting higher-impact insights that might have been possible if data from multiple health
jurisdictions could have been analysed in juxtaposition [89].
Traditional process mining techniques operate by assuming that all relevant available process data has been curated
into a central site for analysis. However, anonymising, giving control access and safely transferring sensitive data
across organizations is non-trivial. Moreover, organizations face legal constraints, risk of data breaches (or hacks) along
with data integration challenges, preventing them from building a centralised data warehouse [43]. This leads to a
scenario where event-log data is present in organizational silos and distributed among several custodians, none of
whom are allowed to share/transfer their sensitive data directly with each other [87]. Mining process data in such
cross-silo settings can prove to be invaluable for providing relevant operational support to organizations if privacy
guarantees can be offered [74].
Differential Privacy provides us with a formal privacy notion for datasets that are released publicly or might come in
contact with potentially malicious adversaries [98]. It is considered as the de facto standard for ensuring privacy in a
variety of domains. The definition proposed by Dwork et al. [45] offers a mathematically rigorous gold standard for
ensuring privacy protection when analyzing datasets like process logs(or results of a randomized algorithm) that might
contain sensitive or private information. We modify the definition slightly for event logs:
Definition 1: Differential Privacy (adapted from [45]) A randomized mechanism M : D → R with a domain
D(𝑒.𝑔.,, possible event logs) and range R(𝑒.𝑔., all possible trained models ) satisfies (𝜖,𝛿)− differential privacy if
for any two adjacent process logs 𝑙,𝑙′ ∈ D and for any subset of outputs 𝑆 ⊆ R it holds that Pr[M(𝑑) ∈ 𝑆] ≤
𝑒𝜖 Pr [M (𝑑′) ∈ 𝑆] +𝛿
Manuscript submitted to ACM
16
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed
Two process log 𝑙 and 𝑙′ are defined to be adjacent if 𝑙′ can be constructed by adding or removing a single in
stance(entry) from the log 𝑙. By bounding the potential worst-case information loss, the above definition provides us
with a strong formal privacy guarantee. Formally, under the (𝜀,𝛿)-differential privacy definition, we measure Differential
Privacy properties of our method by epsilon and delta values. Epsilon(𝜖) is the privacy loss parameter in differential
privacy and is inversely proportional to the amount of noise added. i.e Lower values of 𝜀 imply stronger privacy
guarantees. A Differentially private mechanism typically involves using a randomized mechanim that perturbs the
input dataset, intermediate calculations, or the outputs of a function, using a calculated quantity of noise (usually at the
cost of utility) [44]. Such a mechanism is considered private if it hides the isolated contribution of any single individual
in the databases. i.e removing a single entry will not result in much difference in the output distribution [1] [45].
In Privacy-Preserving Distributed Process Discovery, our goal is to discover a global process model by privately
mining multiple distributed process log independently and share only the resulting insights from each analysis. i.e
mining a differentially private process model, without ever pooling the data to a central site, in a way that reveals
nothing but the final discovery process model to the participating organizations.
Most typical methods presented in the literature rely on some form of data transformation in order preserve user
privacy. These techniques are a trade-off between information loss and privacy[7]. Techniques based on Secure Sum
Protocol [23] permits a network of nodes to transmit a numeric sum (from node to node) to which each node adds
a node-specific number without having any node being able to compute what the individual contributions of the
participating nodes were. The final node obtains the sum of the numbers contributed by all of the participating nodes,
again without being able to compute what the individual nodespecific numbers were. This protocol can be used to
create distributed versions of most process mining algorithms. Elkoumy et al. [48] propose an architecture based on
Sharemind, which uses multiparty compute to mine a directly follows graph. However they don’t provide differential
privacy guarantees.
4.7 Knowledge-Centric Process Mining:
In process mining, while a lot of emphasis has been on analyzing and extracting process insights from the observed
behaviour logged in event logs, the knowledge dimension associated with business processes has received very little
attention [34]. i.e Current process mining techniques are self-contained and have minimal capacity to leverage and
reasoning using prior knowledge. In practice, this means process mining algorithms can’t perform inference that goes
beyond the implicit knowledge which is recorded in the event logs. Traditional mining techniques focus on mining
behaviour that inherently cannot represent all of the cascading hierarchical structure representing complex real-world
processes [141]. These algorithms can’t reason about abstract relationships between various objects involved in the
process. For example, easily-drawn inferences that people can readily answer without direct training like smoke is seen
so there must be fire happening cannot be inferred by the current process mining methods. This leads to an incomplete
understanding of process behaviour where process analysts are left trying to abstract, simplify, and even leave out key
relationships needed for complete understanding of process behaviour.
Process knowledge has many faces and it will differ from other forms of organizational knowledge as it will be
highly contextual, sometimes tacit and relevant to a particular domain. Organizations have realised that knowledge
and processes are interlinked and should explicitly be made a key component of business processes [8]. Knowledge
is more complex than simple data or information with an additional characteristic of being subjective, as its often
tacit in nature (e.g obtained with years of experience). Process knowledge has many faces and it will differ from other
forms of organizational knowledge as it will be highly contextual, sometimes tacit and relevant to a particular domain.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process Mining, Predictive Process Monitoring, and
Process-Aware Recommender Systems
17
Sometimes this knowledge is documented but even then it exists in silos of unstructured documents, often halting the
progress of processes to consult any knowledge bases that might exist.
For organizations, having access to the right knowledge at the right time is crucial to effective decision making
as it allows companies to solve problems quickly, diffuse best practices amongst employees, cross fertilize ideas and
enable them to stay competitive [139]. Managing Process knowledge requires a deliberate and systematic approach
which should be reflected at all levels of organization. Organizations employ various knowledge managements tools to
capture and create the knowledge that is either explicit or tacit by sometimes interviewing experts, telling war stores,
and apprenticeship style training programs. Despite several attempts, modern organizations find capturing managing
the available knowledge(in terms of capturing, codifying, and sharing) difficult and rely on knowledge workers for
know-how. This leads to organizations routinely forgetting the lessons learned during the past when knowledge workers
leave or switch projects. Overtime organizations have realised the importance of deliberate and systematic approach
for creating a culture where company’s knowledge base in maintained [152] and many expert systems, and Enterprise
knowledge management systems have been proposed to capture knowledge effectively, categorize it and then make
that knowledge available across an organization. Such tools can codify knowledge in the form of wikis, cognitive maps,
decision trees, knowledge graphs etc. These movements were largely unsuccessful[46].
Knowledge management has largely been ignored in recent years. Solutions are needed that tackle knowledge
management challenges and help organization extract actionable knowledge from all available process related data(e.g
extracting meaningful knowledge from unstructured documents) and make it widely available inside the organisation.
Similarly, Common-sense reasoning has been highlighted as one of the major challenges for the process analytics research
community [19]. It follows a broader trend in AI research where the need for solving complex tasks by incorporating
knowledge and common-sense reasoning has been repeatedly highlighted [30]. Furthermore incorporating domain
knowledge by means of constraints can support process analysts in their efforts to fully understand executed process
behaviour recorded in real-world event logs and improve the outcome of process mining activities.
4.8 Discussion:
The topics covered in this section, along with classic topics like process discovery continue to provide opportunities for
research contribution. We note that even with the availability of various state of the art process discovery methods,
understanding business processes and resource behaviour from process logs alone remains a challenging problem[13].
Furthermore systematic adoption of process mining in challenging domains like healthcare, also remains a challenge
[102]. Process mining techniques can be of great value to answer process-related questions and is often a starting point
for process analysts, however, more support is needed to address the challenges faced by process analysts. Carmona [21]
has highlighted some of the open problems and research challenges associated with process discovery and conformance.
Their findings show that the existing mining methods struggle to deal with challenges like spaghetti models, concept
drift and identifying events that occurred at different levels of abstraction. We also observe that traditional process
mining and analysis techniques have not given significant attention to the analysis of resource behaviour and its affects
on process outcomes. Resource analysis deserves more attention from the research community as knowledge about
resource behaviour can be used for effective planning, strategizing and gaining insights which lead to better overall
process performance. In [150] Brocke et al. present an enterprise framework for analyzing the effects of process mining
that emerge at various levels of an organization. Lastly, by understanding contextual factors and gaining detailed
insights about how processes are being executed within a particular context also remains an interesting challenge.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
18
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed
Data Challenges: Process mining techniques are primarily reliant on process logs, which don’t always explicitly
capture all the behaviour of past executed processes[6]. Such logs are susceptible to domain gaps, data bias (due
to incompleteness) and quality issues (due to noise and erroneous data recordings). Many real world processes are
unstructured in nature and for these processes most state-of-the-art process discovery algorithms produce, hard
to-interpret, spaghetti-like models which poorly fit the event log. This negatively influences the usefulness of the
discovered process model. Often times discovered models are hard to interpret from a process analyst perspective while
also prone to under-fitting or over-fitting the given event logs, offering only minuscule support for improving process
outcomes. Furthermore, a particular challenge in process mining is the management of business-process variants and
contemporary business process management tools do not provide adequate support for modeling and management of
process variants [136]. For complex domains like healthcare, where improving clinical outcomes can directly impact the
quality of life for patients, this implies that process analysts miss out on the opportunities for a complete understanding
of the underlying process behaviour and subsequently extracting higher-impact insights.
Event data can come from various heterogeneous data sources and in several data formats. These logs are rarely in the
desired format and form. It is common for process analysts to apply a series for pre-processing steps for consolidation,
verification(checking for errors and inconsistencies) and transformation. To identify an event trace representative of a
process instance, is challenging and is often done manually using techniques like extraction, correlation, and abstraction
of the event data by the process analyst [37]. There is also the challenge of ’Big data’, where data to be analyzed is of
huge volume, velocity and variety, making it unfeasible to be analysed with traditional analysis tools. Other challenges
include the diversity of formats and nonstandard data models [119]. To maximize the utility of available data, it is
sometimes useful to build a data lake that provides a single consolidated view of organizations’ datasets. Data lake
makes the preparation and analysis(by querying) of data more accessible. Such data can also include relevant context
in which business processes were executed (this could be the context for an entire process or an individual task) and
enable organizations to gain insights that help improve existing processes.
As observed in various other fields of AI and machine learning, an important driver of measuring progress is
precisely defining Process Analytic tasks(using mathematically rigorous definitions) and building useful benchmark
datasets that can be used for performance comparison [15]. The progress of the field depends on the cycle of identifying
real-world problems, researchers proposing novel techniques and industry adaptation of such techniques. It is therefore
important to make quantifiable progress by benchmarking process analytics tasks on standard datasets with well
defined performance metrics. We observe that many process mining published papers often lack strong reproducible
experiments, resulting in poor comparability and relative merits of the proposed approach. So far, only in predictive
process analytics, we have seen the adoption of rigorous evaluation criteria. We refer to work by [6] as an example
of such an effort where Augusto et al. review various state-of the art process discovery methods and benchmark the
performance of various automated discovery algorithms. We hope future studies will follow the same approach where
they critique and compare proposed methods against existing state-of-art process mining techniques via standard
benchmarks.
5 PREDICTIVE PROCESS MONITORING
Predictive business process monitoring is a family of techniques concerned with predicting the future state, outcomes
and behaviour of ongoing cases of a business process[137]. For organizations, process monitoring is a useful capability
that enables operational support for near real-time monitoring of processes and allows them to take preventive measures
that help avoid conformance violations, undesired deviations and prevent delays.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process Mining, Predictive Process Monitoring, and
Process-Aware Recommender Systems
19
Predictive analytics can be also be viewed as, computing a set of functions or a set of computer programs that carry
out computation, over a (partially executed) process instance to perform continuous monitoring of process instances.
Such methods can leverage historical(completed) executions logs, such as event logs, along with available contextual
data, in order to: recommending appropriate actions at each stage, early detection of process variation or anomalies(for
fraudulent behaviour), predict various properties of a case instance, help perform early risk assessments and assist with
resource allocation decision[155].
The research goals of the field of Predictive Analytics can be framed as following research questions:
Given an an event log of a completed business process execution cases and the final outcome for each case, Can we:
• Predict the next best activity to execute (in order to achieve optimal outcomes)? or Predict the outcome of a
single activity
• Predict the entire sequence of activities leading to the process end?
• Predict if the running process instance will meet its performance targets
• Predict the total remaining time to completion for a process instance?
• Predict the performance outcome of an incomplete case, based on the given (partial) trace (redundant)
• Predict the cycle time of a given process instance ?
• Estimate the likely cost that will be incurred in executing the remainder of the process?
Machine learning allows us to build models from past experiences embedded in the process data and use it to provide
real-time or near real-time decision support. Over the years many machine learning techniques, such as regressions,
support vector machines etc. have been used to build predictive models from historical data. In Predictive Process
Monitoring, we study methods for building predictive models that utilize historical execution traces to predict the
likelihood of events and forecast outcomes such as next activity prediction, process outcome prediction or remaining
time prediction [93]. Predictive analytic methods can determine factors that influence the process outcomes and violate
performance targets [157].
Deep Learning: Recent advances in neural network architectures and availability of large datasets has led to the
popularization of using ’deep learning‘ methods for predictive analytics. Deep Learning methods have been proposed
for predicting how the future of a given process instance will unfold and the likely occurrence of certain events.
Deep Learning methods are particularly good at discovering intricate structure and robust representations from large
quantities of raw data, thus significantly reducing the need to handcraft features which is typically required in traditional
machine learning techniques [88]. DNN’s have a number of processing layers that can be used to learn representations
of data with multiple tiers of abstraction. The different tiers are obtained by producing non-linear modules that are
used to transform the representation at one tier into a representation at a more abstract tier. Deep Convolutional
Neural Nets and Recurrent Neural Nets are two popular architectures of DNNs, that brought about breakthroughs in
processing text, images, video, speech and audio [88]. Recurrent Neural Nets, especially the Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) have brought about breakthroughs in solving complex sequence modelling tasks in various domains such video
understanding, speech recognition and natural language processing [88] [121]. LSTMs work by maintaining a dynamic
short-term memory vector, which stores the summarization of historical events, from which the next activity can be
predicted. It has been shown that LSTM can consistently outperform classical techniques for a number of process
analytics tasks such as predicting the next activity, time to the next activity and so on.[104].
Machine Learning methods require vector representations of input data and manually encoding or crafting features
is a tedious task in practice. Deep learning methods have an advantage over such classical methods as they can
Manuscript submitted to ACM
20
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed
generalize well on various tasks without requiring explicit Feature engineering or configuration tuning [5]. Further
these methods exhibit ’robustness to noise’ and can show performance scaling as we input bigger and bigger datasets[50].
In Process analytics we can leverage the deep learning methods to automatically find highly compact low-dimensional
representations (features) of high-dimensional data. In [3] Seeliger propose recurrent neural networks (RNNs) based
architecture that automatically learns vector representations of cases. They train the network to predict the contextual
factors of the corresponding case. This allows us to incorporate contextual factors of a case into a single compact vector
representation, later to be used for process mining.
Predictive process analytics techniques support managers in operational decision-making processes by for example
taking remedial actions as business processes unfold. Picking the best method depends on the domain, available datasets,
choice of input features use train the models etc. For running process instances, making accurate and early predictions
using limited computing resources still remains a challenge. Early accurate predictions of outcomes, explainability
(reasoning behind why certain predictions were made) and prescribing actions to prevent undesired outcomes are some
of the problems that are under active investigation by the research community. Various survey papers have tried to
cover the literature on predictive analytics. Marquez-Chamorro et al. [97] and Di Francescomarino et al.(2018) [35]
classify the literature based on input data, classification algorithm and prediction target. Similarly, [137] [149] also
survey the field by covering various datasets, propose task definitions and provide benchmark comparison of recently
proposed algorithms. We briefly describe the relevant problems studied under predictive process monitoring:
5.1 Next Activity Prediction
Next Activity Prediction refers to the problem of predicting the next trace suffix likely to occur during the execution. In
Next Activity Prediction, we attempt to derive a process-agnostic machinery for learning to generate recommendations
and predict the future behaviour of a given partially executed process instance while assuming minimal domain
knowledge. Models are trained using historic data and after training, the input is using the observed prefixes of running
process cases (event stream). The problem has been tackled using various machine learning techniques where it is often
treated as a multi-class classification problem. The next event(of a process instance) can be represented as one class
that the ML classifier can predict.
Prediction techniques based on deep learning have a popular choice and have shown promising results[50] [97].
Such techniques are often motivated by the applications of deep learning to Natural Language Processing tasks (e.g
langauge modeling). Tama and Comuzi [132] and Weinzierl et. al. [155] provide a comparison of architectures and
encoding techniques for next activity prediction using real world logs. We can use several evaluation metrics(e.g
Accuracy, F1-score etc.) to compare the methods. Brunk et al. [16] consider the problem of context-sensitive process
predictions(in business process monitoring) by employing evidence sensitivity analysis to determine if context is cause
or effect of the next event during execution. This allow us to understand the impact that a context variable can have on
a running instance and offers an explanation for understanding why a certain prediction was made. While LSTMs based
techniques can theoretically deal with long event sequences, the long-term dependencies between distant events in a
process get diffused into the memory vector. We therefore seek modeling methods that are more expressive and allow
storing and retrieval of intermediate process states in a long-term memory. To tackle this, recently, Khan et al.[78]
explore the application specific type of neural network known as the memory–augmented neural network (MANN) for
the task of next event. In a typical setting, a MANN is a recurrent neural network (e.g., LSTM [8]) augmented with an
external memory matrix. Differential Neural Computer architecture can be adapted the to account for a variety of tasks
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process Mining, Predictive Process Monitoring, and
Process-Aware Recommender Systems
21
in predictive process analytics: (i) separating the encoding phase and decoding phase, resulting dual controllers, one for
each phase; (ii) implementing a write-protected policy for the memory during the decoding phase.
5.2 Process Path Prediction
Predicting the evolution of running cases is an important problem and plays a key role in risk management, resource
allocation and process improvement. Similar to Next Activity, Process Path Prediction methods can predict possible
paths of a running instance up to its completion[147]. Tax et. al. [134] and Evermann et al. [49] explore the use of
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) to solve various process predictive problems. Tax. et al.[134] show the use of LSTM
neural networks for predicting the sequence of the future activities. Similarly, Camargo et al. [20] employ deep learning
techniques to predict sequences of next events, their timestamp, and their associated resource pools. Considering
context(as cause or effect) when making these predictions is also an interesting problem studied by Brunk et. al. [16].
Tama and Comuzzi provide a comprehensive empirical comparison and bechmarking for such techniques [132].
5.3 Time-related Predictions
Time-related Predictions problems such as Predicting the remaining cycle time, ompletion time and case duration,
predicting delayed process executions and deadline violations of running instances has been studied extensively.
Indicators available in event logs can be exploited to make predictions about time-related risks[143]. Verenich et. al.
[149] have done an extensive survey of various methods used for predicting the remaining cycle time and present
a cross-benchmark comparison. Van Dongen et. al. [146] apply non-parametric regression on event data to predict
remaining cycle time. Similarly [50] employ RNN to predict the duration of activities. Similarly, Tax. et al.[134] propose
a prediction method based on Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) neural networks.
5.4 Process Outcome Predictions
The problem of case outcome prediction aims at identifying process instances that will end up in an undesirable state
(measured as likelihood and severity of fault occurrence or violation of compliance rules) [147]. Instances can be labelled
as normal or deviant and then process related risks can be classified using any of the traditional modern machine
learning techniques. The case outcomes can be assessed primarily by first checking if the process has met its ’hard
goals’ and then soft goals (determined by KPIs such as time quality, cost etc.) Similarly, in Compliance monitoring
techniques are aimed at preventing Compliance violations by monitoring ongoing executions of a process and checking
if they comply with respect to certain business constraints[147].
5.5 Discussion
Explainability Explainablility or Interpretability remains a key challenge in predictive business process monitoring.
Interpretability is defined as "the ability to explain or to present in understandable terms to a human" and often stems from
incompleteness in problem formulation leading to unquantified bias [38]. Business process stakeholders and decision
makers can only fully trust prescriptive support systems that offer an explanation for the decisions or recommendations
made [2]. Decision Support systems which leverage machine learning methods must therefore be able to explain the
reasoning behind certain decisions, recommendations, predictions made or actions taken. Predictive process monitoring
methods should explain why the predictive model was mistaken when the predictions are inaccurate. By making systems
and models interpretable we want to ensure that decisions and data can be explained to end users in a transparent
and easy to understand manner [2]. Increasingly, Explainability and Interpretability is not just a desirable property but
Manuscript submitted to ACM
22
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed
increasingly becoming a serious matter of public debate. In some countries compliance laws will require ’a right to
explanation’ which means end-users can ask for an explanation of a certain decision that affects their lives [57]. This also
means that use of black box methods (such as Deep Neural Networks) in predictive and prescriptive approaches will be
infeasible as we can’t explain the decisions or predictions made. ’Explainablility’ and ’establishing trust’ in these models
remains one of the key challenges, not only for sensitive domains like healthcare but now for everyday consumer-facing
products as well. Therefore, developing systems that provide trustworthy explanations and the necessary chain of
reasoning that led to particular decisions and outcomes remains a significant challenge for future research work in
predictive and prescriptive monitoring. Several methods have been proposed to make systems more comprehensible.
Rizzi et. al. [114] for example propose a method that uses post-hoc explainers and encoding for identifying the most
common features that explains incorrect predictions. By reducing the impact of identified features, explanations can
be used to improve model accuracy. Brunk et. al. [16] take a different approach to the problem of making transparent
context-sensitive predictions by proposing a next event prediction technique based on dynamic Bayesian network.
Galanti et. al. [54] propose a based framework based on game theory of Shapley Values for explaining the predictions.
Their framework is based based on LSTM models, and can explain any generic KPI. Lastly, Verenich et. al. [148] employ
flow analysis technique for predicting quantitative performance indicators of running process instances. Their technique
can be used to estimate values of this performance indicator (e.g cycle time) by aggregating performance indicators of
the activities composing the process. We refer the readers to the work by Doshi-Velez and Kim [38] and Adadi and
Berrada [2] for a more detailed discussion around the topics of ’Interpretability’ and ’Explainable AI’.
6 OPTIMIZING PROCESS DECISIONS THROUGH GOAL-DIRECTED DECISION SUPPORT
Business process management assists organizations in planning and executing activities that collectively deliver business
value, usually in the form of a product or a service. Flexible execution of business process instances entails multiple
critical decisions, involving various actors and objects, taken to achieve optimal process outcomes[137].These decisions
are of variable nature and context dependent as Business operate under uncertain real-world environments. Sub-optimal
decisions during process execution, such as picking the wrong execution path, incorrect resource allocation, can
affect business processes outcomes leading to cost overruns and missed deadlines [56]. These decisions therefore
require careful attention, therefore, ability to guide and automate decision making, therefore, is crucial to maintaining
and improving business process performance[60]. Overall, Analytics-driven decision support for process users and
knowledge workers remains a significant challenge for BPM research [22].
Historically, Process support has largely focused on development of Workflow Management Systems and later
evolving to Business Process Management Systems(BPMSs). Such systems have played a significant role in facilitating
analysis, improvement, and enactment of business processes[122]. However, future systems will tackle the challenge of
leveraging historic and current contextual data for providing intelligent assistance to process users, and in guiding
process-related decisions. We foresee future process analytic decision-making systems or decision-support would take
the role of:
• Recommending the best suffix for a task sequence, which, if executed, will lead to a desired outcomes or desired
performance characteristics. This means identify a process path that would yield best performance in a given
context.
• Providing support for Knowledge-intensive processes to assist knowledge workers. e.g. Generating optimal
action recommendations for a process instance while accounting for various sources of uncertainty.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process Mining, Predictive Process Monitoring, and
Process-Aware Recommender Systems
23
• Providing support for risk-aware Process Management. e.g. by early identification of process associated risks
and generating recommendations for corrective actions that can help avoid a predicted metric deviation.
• Providing support for Resource Management. e.g. assess the suitability of a resource in executing a certain task
and support resource allocation decisions by suggesting optimal work assignment policies
• Providing strategic support for robust process execution and for developing robust strategic plans in adversarial
settings while carefully balancing multiple objectives
We discuss some of these ideas in detail below:
6.1 Risk-Informed Decision Making
Modern organizations operate in dynamic environments and face the challenge of dealing with uncertainties(risks)
associated with various process decisions due to environmental factors that are often not fully under their control.
Managing process-related risks by making risk-informed decisions remains a key challenge for organizations. Risk
reduction usually involves decreasing the likelihood and severity of faults during process execution and ensuring that
desired performance goals are met.
Management of risks during process execution remains a challenging problem[129]. The ability to detect potential
metric deviations early on is valuable in giving process owners decision information for a timely intervention. One
primary goal of process decision support during Business process execution is to guide risk-informed decisions at
run-time by modeling, detecting and mitigating risks as early as possible. In practice, this means using predictive and
prescriptive techniques to identify process instances that are likely to get delayed or to terminate abnormally. This
involves using those predictions to intervene early, recommend actions or support resource allocations decisions at
run-time that enable organizations to avoid or decrease the likelihood of metric overrun.
To tackle these challenges, Risk-based decision support (RDS)(Sometimes known as Risk-aware Business Process
Management Systems) have been proposed to help with early detection of factors by predicting risks in terms of
metrics deviations during process execution. They can make recommendations that can help minimize the predicted
process risk and avoid negative outcomes. The performance criteria of business processes are typically described by
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), and their target values can be defined based on business goals. They can assist in
risk management by monitoring KPIs, PPMs, and QoS metrics. Overall, reduce risks (in terms of metrics deviations
during process execution) to provide decision support for a given process, e.g., recommending the next process activity,
which minimizes process risks. When those deviations exceed a tolerance threshold, interventions can be taken to
decrease the likelihood of unfavourable outcomes.
Risk reduction techniques allow us to identify process instances that are at risk of not meeting certain performance
criteria and recommend preventive actions to process participants. Several techniques have been proposed in the
literature for modeling and detection of risk. Suriadi et. al. [129]. Provide a comprehensive review of techniques for
managing process-related risks. Literature on prescriptive business process monitoring consists of techniques [60] [24]
[122] that can be used to recommend preventive actions in order to support risk-informed decision making.
Future Business Process Management systems must, therefore, assist process users/stakeholders in risk-informed
decision making by generating predictions and recommendations that help reduce such risks [36]. Risk Management
and BPM were historically separate fields, and their integration is understudied, leaving room for future research
contributions [129]. Conforti et al. [25] discuss the Risk-aware BPM lifecycle where each phase can be complemented
with elements of risk management like Risk Identification, Risk-aware Execution and Risk monitoring etc. Lastly,
Manuscript submitted to ACM
24
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed
problems like real-time risk detection, resource scheduling, Automated risk mitigation and Real-Time Risk Monitoring
are also investigated under the umbrellas of risk-informed decision making[26] [28] [27]. Overall, managing process
related risks by making risk-informed decisions remains a key challenge for organizations.
6.2 Supporting business process execution via Process-Aware Recommender Systems
In the previous section, we discussed how predictive monitoring techniques can provide operational support based on
models learned using historic logs in order to predict what is likely going to happen next and use those prediction
capabilities to influences the outcomes of running case instances. e.g. monitor processes and issue recommendations to
workers and managers based on probability that a given case will violate the set performance targets. The output of
Predictive business process monitoring techniques, is just predictions. Predictions can be used as early warnings for
taking risk informed decisions but do not explicitly support answering of question like What action should we take next
to achieve a particular goal? and Why should we do it?[90]. Compared to descriptive and predictive business analytics,
prescriptive process analytics remains less mature [47]. Marquez et. al. [97] point out that ‘little attention has been given
to providing recommendations’. Instead of providing specific action recommendations, literature on business process
monitoring focuses on forecasting future process events(and outcomes) while leaving the action implementation part
to the subjective judgment of process users and business decision makers[32].
Recommender Systems have found applications in information filtering system such as in video or music services as
playlist generators or content recommendations for social media companies etc[12].
Process-aware Recommender Systems have been proposed to assist knowledge workers, in operational decision
making by recommending actions for executing a particular process/task, manage resource allocation policies and
so on [12] [122]. Eili et al. [47] provide a systematic review of Recommender Systems in Process Mining and classify
recommendation approaches as ‘pattern optimization’, ‘risk minimization’, or ‘metric-based’. For structured processes,
Process-aware Recommender Systems have been proposed to assist knowledge workers, in a context-aware adaptable
fashion by recommending actions for executing a particular process/task, manage resource allocation policies and so
on [12] [122]. Such systems leverage technologies like machine learning to build recommender systems that monitor
process instances, predict future process states and recommend appropriate actions[32].
We should note that most process-aware recommender techniques focus on supporting risk-informed decision
making.Their major focus is on preventive measures early warning recommendations to for example avoid predicted
metric deviation. Another major goal of Process-aware Recommender systems should be to support decisions that
that maximize the likelihood of achieving business goals. e.g Weinzier et al. [154] consider problem of recommending
next best actions that lead to optimal outcomes. Their technique relies on explicitly adding control-flow knowledge to
their proposed technique via formal process model and uses process simulations to verify and filter the predictions
of the trained predictive model. Groger et al. [60] introduce the concept of recommendation-based business process
optimization to support adaptive process execution. Their framework recommends actions for the next process step
to take for a given process instance. For organizations data-driven process optimization enables decision support for
real-time process optimization. e.g. shortening the reaction time of decision-makers to events that may affect changes
in process performance.
6.3 Operational decision support for Knowledge Intensive Processes
Business Processes assist organizations in organizing activities that deliver business value, usually in the form of a
product or a service. Over the last decade, automation has caused the landscape of work to change significantly and
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process Mining, Predictive Process Monitoring, and
Process-Aware Recommender Systems
25
Knowledge workers are now regarded as the most valuable organizational assets. Knowledge work is characterized by
unstructured processes which can be hard to specify at design-time Supporting knowledge workers involved in the
execution of unstructured Knowledge-Intensive Processes by providing context-specific recommendations remains an
interesting challenge.
Knowledge Intensive Processes (KIPs) are processes that require precise expert(tacit) knowledge, involvement
of knowledge workers, and consisting of activities that do not have the same level of repeatability as structured
processes[34]. Instead of assuming a rigid process structure, knowledge-intensive processes (KiPs) are goal-oriented,
often unstructured(with pre-defined fragments) and characterized by activities that cannot be anticipated(or modeled
in advance). KIPs represent a shift from the traditional process management view (where process models are structured
with repeatable tasks), to a model where task execution depends on knowledge workers as primary process participants
[34].
Knowledge workers are highly trained and have specialized expertise in performing complex tasks autonomously and
are considered a key asset for modern businesses. Supporting knowledge work when rigid definitions of process models
are not available or cannot be designed apriori (with structured or unstructured data)remains a key challenge[33].
They typically rely on their experience based intuition and domain expertise, for decision-making. Their work is less
characterized by explicit procedures and more by creative thinking that usually cannot be planned a priori[34]. An
example of knowledge work is Clinical decision-making for patient treatment in the hospital emergency room, which
is highly case-specific and requires a knowledge-driven approach. i.e Treatment Decisions are made based on highly
specific medical domain knowledge, the context in the form of patient’s medical history, years of specialized experience
and evidence that emerges from patient test results and real-time sensors.
Knowledge workers still lack the adequate decision support tools to assist them in executing knowledge-intensive
processes[34]. As we enter the knowledge economy, future process management systems will have to drive processes
in modern enterprises that are highly knowledge-driven, are semi-structured or unstructured while leveraging a
diverse range of process-related datasets. e.g recommend appropriate actions to knowledge workers while operating
in dynamic environments. In [34] Ciccio et al. have provided a set of requirements for process-oriented systems to
support knowledge-intensive processes. One of the inherent challenges that future process management systems must
address is that of flexibility. Flexibility means instance-specific adaptations based on context and environment. Flexible
execution of business process instances involves multiple critical decisions at each step. e.g. what task to perform
next and what resources to allocate to a task and so on. Previously, to address the problem of supporting flexible
knowledge-intensive process, many paradigms have been proposed. e.g Adaptive Process Management(ACM), Flexible
Process Aware Information Systems, case handling systems and declarative processes. Adaptive Case Management
gained the most popularity amongst the various paradigms.
Adaptive Case Management(ACM) is aimed at supporting knowledge workers involved in the execution of
dynamic, unstructured knowledge intensive processes(KIPs) where course of action for the fulfillment of process
goals is highly uncertain[64] [101]. ACM offers a way to manage the entire life-cycle of a “case" by following the
’planning-by-doing’ principle, where work is done by considering the context and is continually adapted based on the
changing characteristics of the environment[101]. In the case management paradigm, the focus is on the case and its
hard to pre-define the sequence of activities. For example, Case is the ‘Product’ being manufactured or a ‘patient’ being
treated where primary driver of case progress is the case data and information that emerges as the case evolves. There
however can exist template or patterns that represent the structured aspects of the process. Here process could be seen
as a recipe for handling cases of specific type [145]. A Case template is created by the knowledge worker, allowing
Manuscript submitted to ACM
26
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed
high degree of flexibility in executing a particular case. Templates can then be used to instantiate case instances and
represents a middle ground between a completely specified structured process and an unstructured process. Case
execution allows us to gather feedback and adapt the templates to be reused in a particular context[96]. Adaptive Case
Management (ACM) has been gaining significant interest for handling unpredictable situations in processes and still
lacks ’common operational semantics’ and a ’proper theory’ [64][66].
In the context of Case Management, the problem of recommending ’next best steps’ in a case management system
based on the knowledge of past similar cases(which is the focus of this work) has been addressed by Schonenberg et al.
[122] and Motahari-Nezhad et al. [100]. Schonenberg et al. attempt it by first finding similar cases based on abstraction,
then using support and Trace Weights to consider the relative importance of a log trace. Similarly, Motahari-Nezhad
et al. [100] have looked at the problem of decision support for guiding case resolution based on how similar cases
were resolved in the past. Such support can complement knowledge workers decisions, often made using personal
experience and expert knowledge[34]. We argue that the notion of recommendations under-pins decision support for
not only structured processes but across the whole spectrum of process management. i.e we see recommendations as a
general-purpose mechanism for providing operational decision-support for not only structured but semi-structured and
unstructured processes as well. In knowledge-intensive processes, for example, recommendations can provide intelligent
assistance to process users by offering concrete support in various process related decisions like resource allocation
decisions or action recommendations etc. Such form of assistance allows knowledge workers to take preemptive actions
that can avoid negative outcomes [122][60]. Data-centric AI approaches hold the promise of supporting knowledge
intensive processes and case management practices, whereby enabling flexible process execution. Khan et al. [77]
propose a data-driven reinforcement learning based recommender system for supporting knowledge workers that
considers the past execution data in addition to characteristics of the objects involved (e.g product or user). The proposed
system recommends the next best action (or sequence of actions) while taking into account asset characteristics and
process context.
6.4 Decision Support for Resource Management
Resources are entities that are responsible for performing activities of a business process and must satisfy various
(sometimes contradictory) business goals. Management of resources involves selecting the right resources, evaluating
the efficiency of resources and optimally allocating tasks to relevant resources [110]. Decision support for resource
management provides process users, intelligent assistance on the optimal allocation of resources based on their
capabilities, past performance, current workload and process characteristics.
Past execution data containing resource allocation decisions and can be leveraged to provide real-time decision
support regarding the allocation of resources at an appropriate time while considering the specific context. Taking
this data-driven approach improve productivity and efficiency of business processes and helps avoid performance
deviations. Selecting the most appropriate resource and assigning it to the right task is often a challenging decision as it
is dependent on task complexity, task priority and expertise of the worker. Traditional resource allocation decisions
are made based on profile matching(perceived capabilities), which often involves human judgment. Such approaches
are not always optimal because of various challenges such as resource unavailability, overloading and uncertainty(of
process execution and resource behaviors) [127]. Traditional thinking also held that the performance of a process is
determined by its design; thus, well-designed careflows would lead to better patient outcomes. More generally, though,
process context also plays an important role. Process context can be defined as knowledge exogenous to a process, and
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process Mining, Predictive Process Monitoring, and
Process-Aware Recommender Systems
27
not consumed as input to a process that nevertheless serves as a determinant of process performance and proposed
a context-aware recommender system for identifying context and using it to support resource allocation and task
allocation decisions.
A number of methods related to learning, reasoning, and planning resource allocation have been proposed in the
literature. e.g. In [110] Rajan et al. have explored addressed the question of context-aware process management. Such
recommender systems can derive data-driven business process provisioning that supports effective dispatching and
staffing policies and assist managers in meeting the desired quality of service (or performance) levels. Russel et al.
[117] discuss workflow resource patterns and have identified three main allocation types, namely, capability-based
allocation(where we match capabilities of available resources with and requirements of an activity), history-based
allocation (using past execution data to make ) and finally Role-based allocation(which considers the organizational
position and relation of the resource). Liu et al. [91] model the task allocation problem as a Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs) and show their Q-Learning based method overcomes many of the shortcomings of traditional methods(e.g. load
imbalance) to compute social relation between two resources. We can also consider various abstraction levels when
allocating resources. e.g. Arias et al. [4] have proposed a recommendation system that dynamically allocates resources
at a sub-process level based on multi-factor criteria (to assess resources). Their proposed tool considers metric scores in
the various dimensions of the resource process cube(knowledge base) to present a ranked list of suitable resources.
Similarly, machine learning approaches can be used to mine resource allocation rules. e.g. Huang et. al. [71] treat
resource allocation as a sequential decision making optimization problem and propose a reinforcement learning based,
resource allocation solution. Their Q-learning based framework allows adjustment of real-time allocation decisions by
learning appropriate allocation policies based on available feedback.
6.5 Strategic Decision Modeling
Goal-orchestration for flexible process execution: Goal models holds the promise of delivering significant value Strategic
Modelling, by providing a hierarchic representation of statements of stakeholder intent, with goals higher in the
hierarchy (parent goals) related to goals lower in the hierarchy (sub-goals) via AND- or OR-refinement links. Goal
models encode important knowledge about feasible, available alternatives for realizing stakeholder intent represented at
varying levels of abstraction. A number of prominent frameworks leverage goal models, including KAOS, i* and Tropos
[153]. Strategic Modelling for organizations selecting amongst alternative goal refinements (OR-refinements). Given a
goal model that delimits that space of goals and sub-goals that an organization can seek to satisfy, this is a critical (and
indeed, only) decision problem to be solved. An AND-refinement of a goal is a statement of know-how that tells the
organization how to achieve a parent goal (although without sequencing information, and thus falling short of being a
full procedure or process model). OR-refinements offer alternative specifications of know-how for a given parent goal.
Replacing tasks or activities with goals in-process models allows us to enact processes in, flexible, context-sensitive
ways. In [120] Santipuri et al. introduce the concept of goal orchestration for modeling processes (or process behavior)
to enable flexible process execution. Goal orchestrations offer abstract, strategy-level views on processes, which can
aid human understanding and ease process redesign. Their proposed technique can mine goal orchestrations from
enterprise event logs and compute alternative task-level realizations of a goal if the initial attempt at realizing the goal
fails to achieve the desired results. Goal-oriented process mining is a promising sub-field. In [55] Ghasemi et al. present
a survey various techniques for mining goals from event logs and argue that combining goals and process mining can
potentially augment the precision, rationality and interpretability of mined models.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
28
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed
Achieving resilience in adversarial settings: The need to future-proof businesses is widely acknowledged as one of the
hardest challenges facing business decision-makers. Businesses need to anticipate environmental changes and the likely
behavior of competitors. Much of what happens in the business environment (the effects of moves by these actors) is
adversarial in nature and adversarial moves prevent or impede the achievement of business goals. Decision-making in
adversarial settings involves reasoning about chains of moves and counter-moves by the adversarial entities involved.
Strategic resilience requires that businesses make decisions that are most resilient to adversarial moves by players in the
business environment. e.g Red teaming allows businesses to informally reason about the adversary’s strategic planning
process[67]. Similarly, in [59] Gou et al. present a decision support framework for robust process enactment. They
leverage adversarial game search (e.g Monte Carlo game tree search) to compute alternative flows in order to anticipate
and account for possible ways in which the execution environment might impede a process from achieving its desired
effects or outcomes. This notion can be extended for strategic decision-making as well, where decision-making is
viewed through an abstraction of a two-player game. Here goal models (representing structured models of strategy) can
be combined with game-tree search using augmented game trees to assist organizations in selecting amongst alternative
goal refinements (OR-refinements). The final computational machinery, overall, provides business management with a
resilient strategic decision-making framework that can reason the consequences of various decisions.
7 DISCUSSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In this section, we present an overarching picture of some of the key challenges and characteristics needed to develop
future process support systems. We can also view these characteristics as feature requirements for building future
business process management and decision support systems. We argue, that in addition to supporting the existing
capabilities, the next generation of business process management systems will offer several additional analytics features
such as process monitoring, resource allocation, risk management. Some of these have already been incorporated by
existing vendor service and product offerings (e.g. Process Monitoring support in Apromore), while problems like
agility support for unstructured knowledge-intensive processes still remain unaddressed.
In [40] Dumas et. al present a vision of AI-Augmented Business Process Management Systems. In such systems
execution flows are not pre-determined rather use AI technology to adapt and reason within a set of restrictions based
on one or more performance indicators. This allows operates largely autonomously, within the boundaries set by the
process frame. Keeping this in mind, We briefly discuss enabling AI technologies for supporting flexible execution of
processes and attain the pre-defined goals of a given business process. One useful abstraction is to see Processes as a
Sequential decision-making activity, where we must make a sequence of decisions in response to information about
the outcomes of our actions as we proceed. Decisions can cover the management of given resources, interventions
for achieving process goals, and supporting decisions or the kind discussed in this section. The problem gets further
complicated when processes are deployed in stochastic environments, where the outcomes of our actions are uncertain.
There exist many approaches for designing decision-making systems and the problem of “learning and decision making
over time to achieve a goal” has been studied by multiple disciplines and they all provide interesting perspectives
[131]. From an agent perspective, There are many methods for designing decision-making agents. They differ in the
responsibilities of the designer and the tasks left to automation. We provide a brief overview of methods that can be
applied to tackle sequential decision problems faced in process analytics.
Reinforcement Learning [130] provides a framework for learning from interaction with the environment in order
to achieve a goal (implicitly defined by the reward function). Reinforcement Learning has widely been used to model
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process Mining, Predictive Process Monitoring, and
Process-Aware Recommender Systems
29
sequential decision problems and has shown great promise in solving large scale complex problems with long time
horizons, partial observability, and high dimensionality of observation and action spaces[14].
Reinforcement Learning (RL) assumes that there is an agent operating in the real world. At each step 𝑡 the agent,
Executes action 𝐴𝑡, Receives an observation 𝑂𝑡 and Receives scalar reward 𝑅𝑡. The Problem can be formulated as a
Markov Decision Process[130] defined by (S,A,𝑇,𝑅) tuples where S and A refer to the state and action spaces;𝑇 : S×
A→S, isthestate transition function and 𝑅 : S × A → R represents the reward function. The goal of the agent is to
estimate an optimal policy 𝜋 : S → A or an optimal action value function𝑞𝜋(𝑠,𝑎) = E𝜋 [𝐺𝑡 | 𝑆𝑡 = 𝑠,𝐴𝑡 = 𝑎] which
maximizes the expected return E 𝐿
𝑡=1𝛾𝑡𝑅𝑡 | 𝜋 over a given MDP[130].
Reinforcement Learning can allow us to formulate process goals as the maximization of a cumulative reward which is
a very powerful general-purpose idea. In process analytics, it can be applied to for example provide decision support
in the form of interventions or action recommendations which are used to generate possibilities from which human
workers can pick the best alternative given the additional context and experience they have access to. i.e RL allows us
for general formulation of sequential decision problems under the assumption that the model is known and that the
environment is fully observable.
Offline Reinforcement Learning in particular provides an excellent opportunity to build adaptive systems that learn
from past experience and leverage feedback in the form of rewards. We can use offline Reinforcement Learning to learn
the decision criteria representing optimal outcomes and use it to recommend optimal action based on the current state
of the process. Offline Reinforcement Learning requires sufficiently diverse training data that is close to cases that system
might encounter in the future. Further it requires that we define a reward function (manifested as the weighted soft
goal score), which captures the goals and priorities of the specific process. A Reinforcement Learning based decision
support system takes a state based view for supporting process related decisions. Such systems can consider context
and recommend actions in each stage of the process(which assumes availability of effect log).
Building adaptive systems via BDI agents: optimal decision making in a sequential context requires reasoning about
future sequences of actions and observations. In Artificial Intelligence, a rational agent will perceive its environment,
use its internal knowledge base, along with reasoning and planning capabilities, to select actions that lead to the
desired goal state(or close) according to some utility measure[118]. Agent-oriented programming deals with modelling
and writing software systems with this concept of rational agent, in which each component, or agent, perceives the
environment through sensors and acts on the environment with actuators[125]. The Belief-Desire-Intention (BDI) agent
is a particularly popular and effective architecture for designing such agents. A typical BDI agent program consists
of three components [112]: First, a set of beliefs acquired potentially through sensor inputs. Secondly, a set of plans,
where each plan has an associated triggering event, pre-defined context conditions and plan body consisting of a set of
action sequences. Lastly, a set of goals that an agent wants to achieve. Goals are related to plans. i.e. Each goal can be
achieved by executing plans in the plan library. There are many programming languages and platforms developed over
the last few decades for implementing BDI-agent systems. Some of these languages include PRS (Procedural Reasoning
System) [72], AgentSpeak(L) [111], Jack [25], dMARS (Distributed Multiagent Reasoning System) etc.
Mining agent programs allows organisation to quickly build agent programs that can potentially replace traditional
software systems which are costly and hard to maintain. In [158] Xu et. al. propose a framework for learning BPI agent
plans from process and effect logs. The authors propose a plan recognition framework for generating BDI style plans. The
framework requires input in the form of behaviour logs generated by enterprise applications in order to mine a ‘draft’
version of agent code that can potentially replace some of the applications deployed inside the organisation. Specifically,
Manuscript submitted to ACM
30
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed
a WF-Net is generated using ProM using a number of pre-defined transformation rules and then the generated WF-Net
is transformed into a set of plans using the proposed algorithm. Lastly, effects logs are used to identify context which
becomes the pre-condition for each of the extracted plan. The plans utilise both positive and negative example sets and
uses norm learning mechanisms to infer normative plans.
Robotic Process Automation: Firms are interested in the identification of potential areas of automation to save costs and
improve efficiency. Historically Business Process Management Systems (BPMSs) supported Business process automation
(BPA) by executing process instances, supporting the distribution of work to process participants and delegating
activities to various information systems deployed across the organization (e.g. checking the creditworthiness of an
applicant) [39].
Today we observe a rise of new technologies that can enable Business Process Automation by automating procedural
work and supporting complex processes. Promising technologies like Robotic Process Automation(RPA) and Reinforce
ment Learning hold the promise of replacing human worker and automate repeated tasks. Task automation might
mean replacing human workers entirely with intelligent agents, while decision automation means making decisions
that humans previously made. In other scenarios, it facilitates organizations to automate human decision making. e.g.
automated allocation of resources in complex knowledge-intensive scenarios might mean providing decision support(e.g.
in the form of recommendations) for resources involved in process execution.
RPArepresents an interesting shift, aiming to automate parts of business processes that consist of humans interacting
with day-to-day software(e.g. transferring data from an Enterprise Resource Management system to a web application
form). “Robotic Process Automation (RPA) is an emerging technology that allows organizations automating repetitive
clerical tasks by executing scripts that encode sequences of fine-grained interactions with Web and desktop applications”.
Alternatively “RPA is an umbrella term for tools that operate on the user interface of other computer systems in the way a
human would do”
In the context of Process Analytics, RPA aims at automating business processes that consist of human interaction
with software and provide decision support for resources involved in process execution. Implementing RPA is suitable
in situations where processes that are too infrequent for traditional process automation to be profitable, but still
repetitive enough to be formalized into an RPA process mode. We can identify opportunities of autommation from logs
of interactions between workers and Web and desktop applications. Frameworks like Value-driven RPA [79] are useful
identify right sub-processes to automate, given the process context.
Automated Process Improvement: In traditional process mining, process optimization occurs as a result of post
mortem data analysis. In Automated Process Improvement, we strive for proactive improvement of business processes
during process execution and attempt to automate as many aspects of a given process as possible. Automated Process
Improvement is one of the most desired capability in process Analytics and can make processes more adaptive [160].
Here we are interested in an intelligent exploration of improvement strategies using domain knowledge and all available
historical and current process-related data(generated by enterprise systems and sensory data).
Search-based optimization techniques allow us to identify and discover opportunities, for improving business
processes, from event lots. We do so by considering various performance metrics. e.g the cycle time and process cost as
key performance indicators(KPIs). Automated Process Improvement can identify various opportunities of improvement.
It can also be used to streamline tasks execution where we identify control-flow related improvement opportunities. e.g
re-ordering, merging and parallelization of tasks. It can also identify opportunities for task automation e.g Using RPA.
Secondly, we can identify best Practices and give recommendations based on the analysis of best performing instances
in the past. Similarly, Automated Process Improvement can also help with optimal resource allocation. As discussed
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process Mining, Predictive Process Monitoring, and
Process-Aware Recommender Systems
31
earlier, we use historic data to come with up optimal resource allocation policies. For example, we can optimally design
staff schedules by analyzing historical data and using process goals formulated as Key Performance Indicators and
systematically evaluate the proposed changes. Lastly, we can optimize decision logic to improve the routing of the
cases, which means adding or removing decision points or enhancing existing decision rules.
Gröger et. al. [60] introduce the concept of recommendation-based business process optimization (rBPO). Such a sys
tem can generate action recommendations during process execution, enabling us to perform process optimization using
pre-specified metrics. Apart from mining based approaches, predictive methods can generate action recommendations
during process execution. Lastly, Bozorgi et. al. [29] show that treatment recommendations (based on causal machine
learning), when applied during the execution of a case can improve the overall outcome of a process.
8 CONCLUSION
Modern organizations routinely deploy process analytics, including process discovery and variant analysis techniques,
both to gain insight into the reality of their operational processes and also to identify process improvement oppor
tunities. Process analytics refers to the repertoire of techniques centred on process mining, predictive monitoring,
decision and automation support. Process analytic approaches play a critical role in supporting the practice of Business
Process Management and continuous process improvement by leveraging process-related data to identify performance
bottlenecks, reducing costs, extracting insights, and optimizing the utilization of available resources. They also enable
us to mine insights from process data (which encompasses process logs but include many other types of data as well),
predict the behavior of process instances and provide operational and strategic decision support. In this work, we
briefly surveyed the literature on process analytics and identified promising directions for future research.
REFERENCES
[1] Gergely Acs and Claude Castelluccia. 2012. Dream: Differentially private smart metering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1201.2531 (2012).
[2] Amina Adadi and Mohammed Berrada. 2018. Peeking inside the black-box: A survey on Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI). IEEE Access 6
(2018), 52138–52160.
[3] Timo Nolle Alexander Seeliger, Stefan Luettgen and Max Muhlhauser. 2021. Learning of Process Representations Using Recurrent Neural Networks.
In International Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering. Springer, 36–53.
[4] Michael Arias, Eric Rojas, Jorge Munoz-Gama, and Marcos Sepúlveda. 2016. A framework for recommending resource allocation based on process
mining. In International Conference on Business Process Management. Springer, 458–470.
[5] Kai Arulkumaran, Marc Peter Deisenroth, Miles Brundage, and Anil Anthony Bharath. 2017. A brief survey of deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1708.05866 (2017).
[6] Adriano Augusto, Raffaele Conforti, Marlon Dumas, Marcello La Rosa, Fabrizio Maria Maggi, Andrea Marrella, Massimo Mecella, and Allar Soo.
2018. Automated discovery of process models from event logs: Review and benchmark. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 31, 4
(2018), 686–705.
[7] Mervat Bamiah, Sarfraz Brohi, Suriayati Chuprat, et al. 2012. A study on significance of adopting cloud computing paradigm in healthcare sector.
In 2012 International Conference on Cloud Computing Technologies, Applications and Management (ICCCTAM). IEEE, 65–68.
[8] Rebecca O Barclay and Philip C Murray. 1997. What is knowledge management. Knowledge praxis 19, 1 (1997), 1–10.
[9] Kimon Batoulis, Andreas Meyer, Ekaterina Bazhenova, Gero Decker, and Mathias Weske. 2015. Extracting decision logic from process models. In
International conference on advanced information systems engineering. Springer, 349–366.
[10] Anne Baumgrass. 2011. Deriving current state RBAC models from event logs. In 2011 Sixth International Conference on Availability, Reliability and
Security. IEEE, 667–672.
[11] Ekaterina Bazhenova, Susanne Bülow, and Mathias Weske. 2016. Discovering decision models from event logs. In International Conference on
Business Information Systems. Springer, 237–251.
[12] Amin Beheshti, Shahpar Yakhchi, Salman Mousaeirad, Seyed Mohssen Ghafari, Srinivasa Reddy Goluguri, and Mohammad Amin Edrisi. 2020.
Towards Cognitive Recommender Systems. Algorithms 13, 8 (2020), 176.
[13] Boualem Benatallah, Sherif Sakr, Daniela Grigori, Hamid Reza Motahari-Nezhad, Moshe Chai Barukh, Ahmed Gater, Seung Hwan Ryu, et al. 2016.
Process Analytics: concepts and techniques for querying and analyzing process data. Springer.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
32
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed
[14] Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemysław Dębiak, Christy Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq
Hashme, Chris Hesse, et al. 2019. Dota 2 with large scale deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680 (2019).
[15] Kathrin Blagec, Georg Dorffner, Milad Moradi, and Matthias Samwald. 2020. A critical analysis of metrics used for measuring progress in artificial
intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.02577 (2020).
[16] Jens Brunk, Matthias Stierle, Leon Papke, Kate Revoredo, Martin Matzner, and Jörg Becker. 2020. Cause vs. effect in context-sensitive prediction of
business process instances. Information Systems (2020), 101635.
[17] Andrea Burattin, Alessandro Sperduti, and Marco Veluscek. 2013. Business models enhancement through discovery of roles.. In CIDM. 103–110.
[18] Cristina Cabanillas, José María García, Manuel Resinas, David Ruiz, Jan Mendling, and Antonio Ruiz-Cortés. 2013. Priority-based human resource
allocation in business processes. In International Conference on Service-Oriented Computing. Springer, 374–388.
[19] Diego Calvanese, Sanja Lukumbuzya, Marco Montali, and Mantas Simkus. 2021. Process mining with common sense. In 2021 International Workshop
on BPM Problems to Solve Before We Die, PROBLEMS 2021, Rome, September 6-10, 2021., Vol. 2938. CEUR-WS, 45–50.
[20] Manuel Camargo, Marlon Dumas, and Oscar González-Rojas. 2019. Learning accurate LSTM models of business processes. In International
Conference on Business Process Management. Springer, 286–302.
[21] Josep Carmona. 2020. Process Mining: Past, Present and (Likely) Future. XII Jornadas de Ciencia e Ingeniería de Servicios (JCIS2016) 220 (2020), 37.
[22] Semra Catalkaya, David Knuplesch, Carolina Chiao, and Manfred Reichert. 2013. Enriching business process models with decision rules. In
International conference on business process management. Springer, 198–211.
[23] Chris Clifton, Murat Kantarcioglu, Jaideep Vaidya, Xiaodong Lin, and Michael Y Zhu. 2002. Tools for privacy preserving distributed data mining.
ACM Sigkdd Explorations Newsletter 4, 2 (2002), 28–34.
[24] Raffaele Conforti, Massimiliano De Leoni, Marcello La Rosa, and Wil MP Van Der Aalst. 2013. Supporting risk-informed decisions during business
process execution. In International Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering. Springer, 116–132.
[25] Raffaele Conforti, Massimiliano de Leoni, Marcello La Rosa, Wil MP van der Aalst, and Arthur HM ter Hofstede. 2015. A recommendation system
for predicting risks across multiple business process instances. Decision Support Systems 69 (2015), 1–19.
[26] Raffaele Conforti, Giancarlo Fortino, Marcello La Rosa, and Arthur HM Ter Hofstede. 2011. History-aware, real-time risk detection in business
processes. In OTM Confederated International Conferences" On the Move to Meaningful Internet Systems". Springer, 100–118.
[27] Raffaele Conforti, Marcello La Rosa, Giancarlo Fortino, Arthur HM Ter Hofstede, Jan Recker, and Michael Adams. 2013. Real-time risk monitoring
in business processes: A sensor-based approach. Journal of Systems and Software 86, 11 (2013), 2939–2965.
[28] Raffaele Conforti, Arthur HM ter Hofstede, Marcello La Rosa, and Michael Adams. 2012. Automated risk mitigation in business processes. In OTM
Confederated International Conferences" On the Move to Meaningful Internet Systems". Springer, 212–231.
[29] Zahra Dasht Bozorgi, Irene Teinemaa, Marlon Dumas, Marcello La Rosa, and Artem Polyvyanyy. 2020. Process Mining Meets Causal Machine
Learning: Discovering Causal Rules from Event Logs. arXiv e-prints (2020), arXiv–2009.
[30] Ernest Davis and Gary Marcus. 2015. Commonsense reasoning and commonsense knowledge in artificial intelligence. Commun. ACM 58, 9 (2015),
92–103.
[31] Massimiliano De Leoni and Wil MP van der Aalst. 2013. Data-aware process mining: discovering decisions in processes using alignments. In
Proceedings of the 28th annual ACM symposium on applied computing. 1454–1461.
[32] Marcus Dees, Massimiliano de Leoni, Wil MP van der Aalst, and Hajo A Reijers. 2019. What if Process Predictions are not followed by Good
Recommendations?(Technical Report). arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10173 (2019).
[33] Claudio Di Ciccio, Andrea Marrella, and Alessandro Russo. 2012. Knowledge-intensive Processes: An Overview of Contemporary Approaches.. In
KiBP@ KR. 33–47.
[34] Claudio Di Ciccio, Andrea Marrella, and Alessandro Russo. 2015. Knowledge-intensive processes: characteristics, requirements and analysis of
contemporary approaches. Journal on Data Semantics 4, 1 (2015), 29–57.
[35] Chiara Di Francescomarino, Chiara Ghidini, Fabrizio Maria Maggi, and Fredrik Milani. 2018. Predictive process monitoring methods: Which one
suits me best?. In International Conference on Business Process Management. Springer, 462–479.
[36] Chiara Di Francescomarino, Chiara Ghidini, Fabrizio Maria Maggi, Giulio Petrucci, and Anton Yeshchenko. 2017. An eye into the future: leveraging
a-priori knowledge in predictive business process monitoring. In International Conference on Business Process Management. Springer, 252–268.
[37] Kiarash Diba, Kimon Batoulis, Matthias Weidlich, and Mathias Weske. 2020. Extraction, correlation, and abstraction of event data for process
mining. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 10, 3 (2020), e1346.
[38] Finale Doshi-Velez and Been Kim. 2017. Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08608 (2017).
[39] Marlon Dumas. 2018. Business Process Analytics: From Insights to Predictions. In International Baltic Conference on Databases and Information
Systems. Springer, 15–20.
[40] Marlon Dumas, Fabiana Fournier, Lior Limonad, Andrea Marrella, Marco Montali, Jana-Rebecca Rehse, Rafael Accorsi, Diego Calvanese, Giuseppe
De Giacomo, Dirk Fahland, et al. 2022. Augmented business process management systems: a research manifesto. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12855
(2022).
[41] Marlon Dumas, Marcello La Rosa, Jan Mendling, and Hajo A Reijers. 2013. Business process management. Springer.
[42] Marlon Dumas, Marcello La Rosa, Jan Mendling, Hajo A Reijers, et al. 2013. Fundamentals of business process management. Vol. 1. Springer.
[43] Reinhold Dunkl, Karl Anton Fröschl, Wilfried Grossmann, and Stefanie Rinderle-Ma. 2011. Assessing medical treatment compliance based on
formal process modeling. In Symposium of the Austrian HCI and Usability Engineering Group. Springer, 533–546.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process Mining, Predictive Process Monitoring, and
Process-Aware Recommender Systems
33
[44] Cynthia Dwork, Krishnaram Kenthapadi, Frank McSherry, Ilya Mironov, and Moni Naor. 2006. Our data, ourselves: Privacy via distributed noise
generation. In Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques. Springer, 486–503.
[45] Cynthia Dwork, Aaron Roth, et al. 2014. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Foundations and Trends in Theoretical Computer
Science 9, 3-4 (2014), 211–407.
[46] Mark Easterby-Smith and Marjorie A Lyles. 2011. Handbook of organizational learning and knowledge management. Number 2nd ed. Wiley Online
Library.
[47] Mansoureh Yari Eili, Jalal Rezaeenour, and Mohammadreza Fani Sani. 2021. A Systematic Literature Review on Process-Aware Recommender
Systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.16654 (2021).
[48] Gamal Elkoumy, Stephan A. Fahrenkrog-Petersen, Marlon Dumas, Peeter Laud, Alisa Pankova, and Matthias Weidlich. 2020. Secure Multi-party
Computation for Inter-organizational Process Mining. In Enterprise, Business-Process and Information Systems Modeling, Selmin Nurcan, Iris
Reinhartz-Berger, Pnina Soffer, and Jelena Zdravkovic (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 166–181.
[49] Joerg Evermann, Jana-Rebecca Rehse, and Peter Fettke. 2016. A deep learning approach for predicting process behaviour at runtime. In International
Conference on Business Process Management. Springer, 327–338.
[50] Joerg Evermann, Jana-Rebecca Rehse, and Peter Fettke. 2017. Predicting process behaviour using deep learning. Decision Support Systems 100
(2017), 129–140.
[51] Kathrin Figl, Jan Mendling, Gul Tokdemir, and Jan Vanthienen. 2018. What we know and what we do not know about DMN. Enterprise Modelling
and Information Systems Architectures (EMISAJ) 13 (2018), 2–1.
[52] Arlene Fink. 2019. Conducting research literature reviews: From the internet to paper. Sage publications.
[53] Mario Frank, Joachim M Buhman, and David Basin. 2013. Role mining with probabilistic models. ACM Transactions on Information and System
Security (TISSEC) 15, 4 (2013), 1–28.
[54] Riccardo Galanti, Bernat Coma-Puig, Massimiliano de Leoni, Josep Carmona, and Nicolò Navarin. 2020. Explainable predictive process monitoring.
In 2020 2nd International Conference on Process Mining (ICPM). IEEE, 1–8.
[55] Mahdi Ghasemi and Daniel Amyot. 2020. From event logs to goals: a systematic literature review of goal-oriented process mining. Requirements
Engineering 25, 1 (2020), 67–93.
[56] Johny Ghattas, Pnina Soffer, and Mor Peleg. 2014. Improving business process decision making based on past experience. Decision Support Systems
59 (2014), 93–107.
[57] Bryce Goodman and Seth Flaxman. 2017. European Union regulations on algorithmic decision-making and a “right to explanation”. AI magazine
38, 3 (2017), 50–57.
[58] Scott Winans Goodspeed. 2004. Translating strategy into action: The balanced scorecard. (2004).
[59] Yingzhi Gou, Aditya Ghose, and Hoa Khanh Dam. 2017. Leveraging Game-tree search for robust process enactment. In International Conference on
Advanced Information Systems Engineering. Springer, 461–476.
[60] Christoph Gröger, Holger Schwarz, and Bernhard Mitschang. 2014. Prescriptive analytics for recommendation-based business process optimization.
In International Conference on Business Information Systems. Springer, 25–37.
[61] Michael Gusenbauer. 2019. Google Scholar to overshadow them all? Comparing the sizes of 12 academic search engines and bibliographic databases.
Scientometrics 118, 1 (2019), 177–214.
[62] Booz Allen Hamilton. 2015. The field guide to data science.
[63] K Harrison-Broninski. 2018. Human Processes. BPTrends. (2018).
[64] Matheus Hauder, Simon Pigat, and Florian Matthes. [n.d.]. Research challenges in adaptive case management: a literature review. In 2014 IEEE 18th
International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference Workshops and Demonstrations. 98–107.
[65] Ari Heiskanen and Michael Newman. 1997. Bridging the gap between information systems research and practice: the reflective practitioner as a
researcher. ICIS 1997 Proceedings (1997), 8.
[66] Marcin Hewelt and Mathias Weske. 2016. A hybrid approach for flexible case modeling and execution. In International Conference on Business
Process Management. Springer, 38–54.
[67] Bryce G Hoffman. 2017. Red Teaming: How Your Business Can Conquer the Competition by Challenging Everything. Crown business.
[68] Bart FA Hompes, Abderrahmane Maaradji, Marcello La Rosa, Marlon Dumas, Joos CAM Buijs, and Wil MP van der Aalst. 2017. Discovering causal
factors explaining business process performance variation. In International Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering. Springer,
177–192.
[69] Peter TG Hornix. 2007. Performance analysis of business processes through process mining. Master’s Thesis, Eindhoven University of Technology
(2007).
[70] Zhengxing Huang, Xudong Lu, and Huilong Duan. 2012. Resource behavior measure and application in business process management. Expert
Systems with Applications 39, 7 (2012), 6458–6468.
[71] Zhengxing Huang, Wil MP van der Aalst, Xudong Lu, and Huilong Duan. 2011. Reinforcement learning based resource allocation in business
process management. Data & Knowledge Engineering 70, 1 (2011), 127–145.
[72] François Felix Ingrand, Michael P Georgeff, and Anand S Rao. 1992. An architecture for real-time reasoning and system control. IEEE expert 7, 6
(1992), 34–44.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
34
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed
[73] MHJansen-Vullers, MWNC Loosschilder, PAM Kleingeld, and HA Reijers. 2007. Performance measures to evaluate the impact of best practices.
In Proceedings of Workshops and Doctoral Consortium of the 19th International Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering (BPMDS
workshop), Vol. 1. Tapir Academic Press Trondheim, 359–368.
[74] Peter B Jensen, Lars J Jensen, and Søren Brunak. 2012. Mining electronic health records: towards better research applications and clinical care.
Nature Reviews Genetics 13, 6 (2012), 395–405.
[75] Sandy Kemsley. 2011. The changing nature of work: from structured to unstructured, from controlled to social. In International Conference on
Business Process Management. Springer, 2–2.
[76] Marc Kerremans. 2018. Market guide for process mining. Gartner Inc (2018).
[77] Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, and Hoa Dam. 2021. Decision Support for Knowledge Intensive Processes Using RL Based Recommendations. In
Business Process Management Forum, Artem Polyvyanyy, Moe Thandar Wynn, Amy Van Looy, and Manfred Reichert (Eds.). Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 246–262.
[78] Asjad Khan, Hung Le, Kien Do, Truyen Tran, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Renuka Sindhgatta. 2018. Memory-augmented neural networks for
predictive process analytics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.00938 (2018).
[79] Mathias Kirchmer and Peter Franz. 2019. Value-driven robotic process automation (RPA). In International Symposium on Business Modeling and
Software Design. Springer, 31–46.
[80] Barbara Kitchenham. 2004. Procedures for performing systematic reviews. Keele, UK, Keele University 33, 2004 (2004), 1–26.
[81] Christopher Klinkmüller, Richard Müller, and Ingo Weber. 2019. Mining Process Mining Practices: An Exploratory Characterization of Information
Needs in Process Analytics. In International Conference on Business Process Management. Springer, 322–337.
[82] Krzysztof Kluza, Weronika T Adrian, Piotr Wiśniewski, and Antoni Ligęza. 2019. Understanding decision model and notation: DMN research
directions and trends. In International Conference on Knowledge Science, Engineering and Management. Springer, 787–795.
[83] Ron Kohavi and Roger Longbotham. 2017. Online Controlled Experiments and A/B Testing. Encyclopedia of machine learning and data mining 7, 8
(2017), 922–929.
[84] Jelmer J Koorn, Xixi Lu, Henrik Leopold, and Hajo A Reijers. 2020. Looking for Meaning: Discovering Action-Response-Effect Patterns in Business
Processes. In International Conference on Business Process Management. Springer, 167–183.
[85] Martin Kuhlmann, Dalia Shohat, and Gerhard Schimpf. 2003. Role mining-revealing business roles for security administration using data mining
technology. In Proceedings of the eighth ACM symposium on Access control models and technologies. 179–186.
[86] Akhil Kumar, Remco Dijkman, and Minseok Song. 2013. Optimal resource assignment in workflows for maximizing cooperation. In Business
process management. Springer, 235–250.
[87] Martin Lang, Thomas Bürkle, Susanne Laumann, and Hans-Ulrich Prokosch. 2008. Process mining for clinical workflows: challenges and current
limitations. In MIE, Vol. 136. 229–234.
[88] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2015. Deep learning. nature 521, 7553 (2015), 436–444.
[89] Richard Lenz and Manfred Reichert. 2007. IT support for healthcare processes–premises, challenges, perspectives. Data & Knowledge Engineering
61, 1 (2007), 39–58.
[90] Katerina Lepenioti, Alexandros Bousdekis, Dimitris Apostolou, and Gregoris Mentzas. 2020. Prescriptive analytics: Literature review and research
challenges. International Journal of Information Management 50 (2020), 57–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.04.003
[91] Xingmei Liu, Jian Chen, Yu Ji, and Yang Yu. 2014. Q-learning algorithm for task allocation based on social relation. In International Workshop on
Process-Aware Systems. Springer, 49–58.
[92] Linh Thao Ly, Stefanie Rinderle, Peter Dadam, and Manfred Reichert. 2005. Mining staff assignment rules from event-based data. In International
Conference on Business Process Management. Springer, 177–190.
[93] Fabrizio Maria Maggi, Chiara Di Francescomarino, Marlon Dumas, and Chiara Ghidini. 2014. Predictive monitoring of business processes. In
International conference on advanced information systems engineering. Springer, 457–472.
[94] Wil van der Aalst Mahnaz Sadat Qafari. 2020. Root Cause Analysis in Process Mining Using Structural Equation Models.
[95] Felix Mannhardt, Massimiliano De Leoni, Hajo A Reijers, and Wil MP Van Der Aalst. 2016. Decision mining revisited-discovering overlapping
rules. In International Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering. Springer, 377–392.
[96] Mike A. Marin, Matheus Hauder, and Florian Matthes. 2016. Case Management: An Evaluation of Existing Approaches for Knowledge-Intensive
Processes. In Business Process Management Workshops, Manfred Reichert and Hajo A. Reijers (Eds.). Springer.
[97] Alfonso Eduardo Márquez-Chamorro, Manuel Resinas, and Antonio Ruiz-Cortes. 2017. Predictive monitoring of business processes: a survey. IEEE
Transactions on Services Computing 11, 6 (2017), 962–977.
[98] Frank McSherry and Kunal Talwar. 2007. Mechanism design via differential privacy. In 48th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science (FOCS’07). IEEE, 94–103.
[99] Decision Model. 2016. Notation (DMN). Version 1.1. Object Management Group, Inc (2016).
[100] Hamid Reza Motahari-Nezhad and Claudio Bartolini. 2011. Next best step and expert recommendation for collaborative processes in it service
management. In International Conference on Business Process Management. Springer, 50–61.
[101] Hamid R Motahari-Nezhad and Keith D Swenson. [n.d.]. Adaptive case management: Overview and research challenges. In 2013 IEEE 15th Conf. on
Business Informatics. 264–269.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Advances in Process Optimization: A Comprehensive Survey of Process Mining, Predictive Process Monitoring, and
Process-Aware Recommender Systems
35
[102] Jorge Munoz-Gama, Niels Martin, Carlos Fernandez-Llatas, Owen A Johnson, Marcos Sepúlveda, Emmanuel Helm, Victor Galvez-Yanjari, Eric
Rojas, Antonio Martinez-Millana, Davide Aloini, et al. 2022. Process mining for healthcare: Characteristics and challenges. Journal of Biomedical
Informatics 127 (2022), 103994.
[103] Tanmayee Narendra, Prerna Agarwal, Monika Gupta, and Sampath Dechu. 2019. Counterfactual Reasoning for Process Optimization Using
Structural Causal Models. In International Conference on Business Process Management. Springer, 91–106.
[104] Nicolò Navarin, Beatrice Vincenzi, Mirko Polato, and Alessandro Sperduti. 2017. LSTM networks for data-aware remaining time prediction of
business process instances. In 2017 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI). IEEE, 1–7.
[105] Hoang Nguyen, Marlon Dumas, Marcello La Rosa, Fabrizio Maria Maggi, and Suriadi Suriadi. 2016. Business process deviance mining: review and
evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.08252 (2016).
[106] Chitu Okoli. 2015. A guide to conducting a standalone systematic literature review. Communications of the Association for Information Systems 37,
1 (2015), 43.
[107] Chun Ouyang, Marlon Dumas, Wil MP Van Der Aalst, Arthur HM Ter Hofstede, and Jan Mendling. 2009. From business process models to
process-oriented software systems. ACM transactions on software engineering and methodology (TOSEM) 19, 1 (2009), 1–37.
[108] Judea Pearl et al. 2009. Causal inference in statistics: An overview. Statistics surveys 3 (2009), 96–146.
[109] Anastasiia Pika, Michael Leyer, Moe T Wynn, Colin J Fidge, Arthur HM Ter Hofstede, and Wil MP Van Der Aalst. 2017. Mining resource profiles
from event logs. ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems (TMIS) 8, 1 (2017), 1–30.
[110] Renuka Sindhgatta Rajan. 2018. Data-Driven and Context-Aware Process Provisioning. Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Wollongong.
[111] Anand S Rao. 1996. AgentSpeak (L): BDI agents speak out in a logical computable language. In European Workshop on Modelling Autonomous
Agents in a Multi-Agent World. Springer, 42–55.
[112] Anand S Rao, Michael P Georgeff, et al. 1995. BDI agents: from theory to practice.. In ICMAS, Vol. 95. 312–319.
[113] Manfred Reichert, Alena Hallerbach, and Thomas Bauer. 2015. Lifecycle management of business process variants. In Handbook on Business Process
Management 1. Springer, 251–278.
[114] Williams Rizzi, Chiara Di Francescomarino, and Fabrizio Maria Maggi. 2020. Explainability in Predictive Process Monitoring: When Understanding
Helps Improving. In International Conference on Business Process Management. Springer, 141–158.
[115] Austin Rosenfeld. 2011. BPM: structured vs. unstructured. Retrieved from www.bptrends.com (2011).
[116] Anne Rozinat and Wil MP van der Aalst. 2006. Decision mining in ProM. In International Conference on Business Process Management. Springer,
420–425.
[117] Nick Russell, Wil MP van der Aalst, Arthur HM Ter Hofstede, and David Edmond. 2005. Workflow resource patterns: Identification, representation
and tool support. In International Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering. Springer, 216–232.
[118] Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. 2002. Artificial intelligence: a modern approach. (2002).
[119] Sherif Sakr, Zakaria Maamar, Ahmed Awad, Boualem Benatallah, and Wil MP Van Der Aalst. 2018. Business process analytics and big data systems:
Aroadmap to bridge the gap. IEEE Access 6 (2018), 77308–77320.
[120] Metta Santipuri, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Khanh Dam, and Suman Roy. 2017. Goal orchestrations: Modelling and mining flexible business processes. In
International Conference on Conceptual Modeling. Springer, 373–387.
[121] Jürgen Schmidhuber. 2015. Deep learning in neural networks: An overview. Neural networks 61 (2015), 85–117.
[122] Helen Schonenberg, Barbara Weber, Boudewijn Van Dongen, and Wil Van der Aalst. 2008. Supporting flexible processes through recommendations
based on history. In International Conference on Business Process Management. Springer, 51–66.
[123] Stefan Schönig, Cristina Cabanillas, Stefan Jablonski, and Jan Mendling. 2015. Mining the organisational perspective in agile business processes. In
Enterprise, Business-Process and Information Systems Modeling. Springer, 37–52.
[124] Arik Senderovich, Matthias Weidlich, Avigdor Gal, and Avishai Mandelbaum. 2014. Mining resource scheduling protocols. In International
Conference on Business Process Management. Springer, 200–216.
[125] Yoav Shoham. 1993. Agent-oriented programming. Artificial intelligence 60, 1 (1993), 51–92.
[126] Renuka Sindhgatta, Gaargi Banerjee Dasgupta, and Aditya Ghose. 2014. Analysis of operational data for expertise aware staffing. In International
Conference on Business Process Management. Springer, 317–332.
[127] Renuka Sindhgatta, Aditya Ghose, and Gaargi Banerjee Dasgupta. 2015. Learning ‘Good Quality’Resource Allocations from Historical Data. In
Service-Oriented Computing-ICSOC 2014 Workshops. Springer, 84–95.
[128] Minseok Song and Wil MP Van der Aalst. 2008. Towards comprehensive support for organizational mining. Decision Support Systems 46, 1 (2008),
300–317.
[129] Suriadi Suriadi, Burkhard Weiß, Axel Winkelmann, Arthur HM ter Hofstede, Michael Adams, Raffaele Conforti, Colin Fidge, Marcello La Rosa,
Chun Ouyang, Anastasiia Pika, et al. 2014. Current research in risk-aware business process management—overview, comparison, and gap analysis.
Communications of the Association for Information Systems 34, 1 (2014), 52.
[130] Richard Sutton and Andrew Barto. 2018. Reinforcement learning:An introduction. MIT-Press.
[131] Richard S Sutton. 2022. The Quest for a Common Model of the Intelligent Decision Maker. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.13252 (2022).
[132] Bayu Adhi Tama and Marco Comuzzi. 2019. An empirical comparison of classification techniques for next event prediction using business process
event logs. Expert Systems with Applications 129 (2019), 233–245.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
36
Asjad Khan, Aditya Ghose, Hoa Dam, and Arsal Syed
[133] Roberto Tardío and Jesús Peral. 2015. Obtaining key performance indicators by using data mining techniques. In International Conference on
Conceptual Modeling. Springer, 144–153.
[134] Niek Tax, Ilya Verenich, Marcello La Rosa, and Marlon Dumas. 2017. Predictive business process monitoring with LSTM neural networks. In
International Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering. Springer, 477–492.
[135] Farbod Taymouri, Marcello La Rosa, Marlon Dumas, and Fabrizio Maria Maggi. 2021. Business process variant analysis: Survey and classification.
Knowledge-Based Systems 211 (2021), 106557.
[136] Farbod Taymouri, Marcello La Rosa, Marlon Dumas, and Fabrizio Maria Maggi. 2021. Business process variant analysis: Survey and classification.
Knowledge-Based Systems 211 (2021), 106557.
[137] Irene Teinemaa, Marlon Dumas, Marcello La Rosa, and Fabrizio Maria Maggi. 2019. Outcome-oriented predictive process monitoring: Review and
benchmark. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD) 13, 2 (2019), 1–57.
[138] Jaideep Vaidya, Vijayalakshmi Atluri, and Qi Guo. 2007. The role mining problem: finding a minimal descriptive set of roles. In Proceedings of the
12th ACM symposium on Access control models and technologies. 175–184.
[139] John Van Beveren. 2002. A model of knowledge acquisition that refocuses knowledge management. Journal of knowledge management (2002).
[140] Wil Van Der Aalst, Arya Adriansyah, Ana Karla Alves De Medeiros, Franco Arcieri, Thomas Baier, Tobias Blickle, Jagadeesh Chandra Bose, Peter
Van Den Brand, Ronald Brandtjen, Joos Buijs, et al. 2011. Process mining manifesto. In International Conference on Business Process Management.
Springer, 169–194.
[141] Wil MP Van der Aalst. 2009. Process-aware information systems: Lessons to be learned from process mining. In Transactions on petri nets and other
models of concurrency II. Springer, 1–26.
[142] Wil MP Van der Aalst. 2016. Process mining: data science in action. Springer.
[143] Wil MP Van der Aalst, M Helen Schonenberg, and Minseok Song. 2011. Time prediction based on process mining. Information systems 36, 2 (2011),
450–475.
[144] Wil MP Van der Aalst and Minseok Song. 2004. Mining social networks: Uncovering interaction patterns in business processes. In International
conference on business process management. Springer, 244–260.
[145] Wil MP van der Aalst, Moniek Stoffele, and JWF Wamelink. 2003. Case handling in construction. Automation in Construction 12, 3 (2003), 303–320.
[146] Boudewijn F van Dongen, Ronald A Crooy, and Wil MP van der Aalst. 2008. Cycle time prediction: When will this case finally be finished?. In OTM
Confederated International Conferences" On the Move to Meaningful Internet Systems". Springer, 319–336.
[147] Ilya Verenich. 2016. A general framework for predictive business process monitoring. Proceedings of CAiSE 2016 Doctoral Consortium: (2016), 1–9.
[148] Ilya Verenich, Marlon Dumas, Marcello La Rosa, and Hoang Nguyen. 2019. Predicting process performance: A white-box approach based on
process models. Journal of Software: Evolution and Process 31, 6 (2019), e2170.
[149] Ilya Verenich, Marlon Dumas, Marcello La Rosa, Fabrizio Maria Maggi, and Irene Teinemaa. 2019. Survey and cross-benchmark comparison of
remaining time prediction methods in business process monitoring. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST) 10, 4 (2019),
1–34.
[150] Jan vom Brocke, Mieke Jans, Jan Mendling, and Hajo A Reijers. 2021. A Five-Level Framework for Research on Process Mining.
[151] Jan Vom Brocke and Michael Rosemann. 2010. Handbook on business process management 2. Springer.
[152] Mark Von Rosing, Henrik Von Scheel, and August-Wilhelm Scheer. 2014. The Complete Business Process Handbook: Body of Knowledge from Process
Modeling to BPM, Volume 1. Vol. 1. Morgan Kaufmann.
[153] Jianyong Wang and Jiawei Han. 2004. BIDE: Efficient Mining of Frequent Closed Sequences. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
Data Engineering. 79–90. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE.2004.1319986
[154] Sven Weinzierl, Sebastian Dunzer, Sandra Zilker, and Martin Matzner. 2020. Prescriptive business process monitoring for recommending next best
actions. In International Conference on Business Process Management. Springer, 193–209.
[155] SvenWeinzierl,SandraZilker,JensBrunk,KateRevoredo,ANguyen,MartinMatzner,JörgBecker,andBjörnEskofier.2020. Anempiricalcomparison
of deep-neural-network architectures for next activity prediction using context-enriched process event logs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01194 (2020).
[156] M Weske. 2019. Business Process Management–Concepts, Languages, Architectures, Verlag. Berlin (2019).
[157] Branimir Wetzstein, Philipp Leitner, Florian Rosenberg, Ivona Brandic, Schahram Dustdar, and Frank Leymann. 2009. Monitoring and analyzing
influential factors of business process performance. In 2009 IEEE International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference. IEEE, 141–150.
[158] Hongyun Xu, Bastin Tony Roy Savarimuthu, Aditya Ghose, Evan Morrison, Qiying Cao, and Youqun Shi. 2013. Automatic BDI plan recognition
from process execution logs and effect logs. In International Workshop on Engineering Multi-Agent Systems. Springer, 274–291.
[159] Weidong Zhao and Xudong Zhao. 2014. Process mining from the organizational perspective. In Foundations of intelligent systems. Springer,
701–708.
[160] Michael Zur Muehlen and Robert Shapiro. 2015. Business process analytics. In Handbook on Business Process Management 2. Springer, 243–263.










------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------





Enhancing Research Methodology and Academic Publishing: A Structured Framework for
Quality and Integrity
Md. Jalil Pirana, Nguyen H. Tranb
aDepartment of Computer Science and Eingeering Sejong University Seoul 05006 South Korea (email: piran@sejong.ac.kr)
bThe University of Sydney School of Computer Science 1 Cleveland Street Darlington NSW 2008 Australia email: (nguyen.tran@sydney.edu.au)
Abstract
arXiv:2412.05683v2  [cs.DL]  12 Dec 2024
Following a brief introduction to research, research processes, research types, papers, reviews, and evaluations, this paper presents a
structured framework for addressing inconsistencies in research methodology, technical writing, quality assessment, and publication
standards across academic disciplines. Using a four-dimensional evaluation model that focuses on 1) technical content, 2) structural
coherence, 3) writing precision, and 4) ethical integrity, this framework not only standardizes review and publication processes
but also serves as a practical guide for authors in preparing high-quality manuscripts. Each of these four dimensions cannot
be compromised for the sake of another. Following that, we discuss the components of a research paper adhering to the four
dimensional evaluation model in detail by providing guidelines and principles. By aligning manuscripts with journal standards,
reducing review bias, and enhancing transparency, the framework contributes to more reliable and reproducible research results.
Moreover, by strengthening cross-disciplinary credibility, improving publication consistency, and fostering public trust in academic
literature, this initiative is expected to positively influence both research quality and scholarly publishing’s reputation.
Keywords: Peer Review Process, Research Quality Assessment, Technical Evaluation, Academic Publishing Standards,
Manuscript Structure, Writing Quality, Ethics Publishing,
1. Introduction
Research is a systematic, creative process that aims to gener
ate new knowledge or apply existing knowledge in novel ways
to understand, describe, explain, or predict phenomena [1, 2]. It
involves collecting, organizing, and analyzing data to uncover
insights and support informed conclusions. Research meth
ods can be inductive, where theories are developed based on
observed patterns, or deductive, where hypotheses are tested
against empirical evidence [3, 4, 5]. Research goes beyond sim
ple discovery, as it addresses questions, solves problems, and
establishes facts, contributing to the advancement of knowledge
across disciplines [6].
Research methodologies and publishing practices are fun
damental to advancing knowledge and fostering academic in
tegrity [7]. Since robust review and standardized evaluation
criteria are crucial to ensuring reproducibility and reliability,
the importance of quality assessment in research articles cannot
be overstated [7]. Publications serve as the primary medium
through which knowledge is disseminated, having an impact on
both the academic community and society [8, 9, 10].
Despite significant efforts to improve methodological consis
tency, technical writing quality, and ethical rigor in academic
publication practices, existing frameworks often lack a unified
approach that addresses the diverse needs of different academic
disciplines. The current literature [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
18], provides valuable guidelines but tends to focus on specific
fields or aspects of the publication process, limiting their gen
eralizability. Additionally, the ethical considerations and biases
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
associated with Artificial Intelligence (AI)-assisted peer review
and the absence of standardized templates for novice writers
highlight the need for a comprehensive model [19]. Inconsis
tencies in evaluation standards between disciplines significantly
affect the credibility of research findings. As academic publish
ing becomes increasingly rigor-driven, there are notable gaps
in achieving consistent, quality-driven manuscript preparation
and evaluation processes. Despite advances in peer review, sig
nificant disparities persist in evaluation criteria between disci
plines, leading to subjectivity that affects both credibility and
reproducibility. This paper addresses these gaps by introducing
a structured, four-dimensional framework encompassing tech
nical content, structural coherence, writing precision, and eth
ical integrity. This model aims to standardize the review and
publication processes in various disciplines, ensuring consis
tent and transparent evaluation of manuscripts, thus improving
the reliability and reproducibility of research outcomes.
In this paper, general authors and reviewers are introduced
to a comprehensive framework for preparing and assessing
manuscripts across four dimensions, including 1) technical con
tent, 2) structural coherence, 3) writing precision, and 4) ethi
cal integrity. This model emphasizes the importance of nov
elty and validity in research, ensuring that manuscripts provide
valuable insights. We then establish criteria for logical structure
and coherence to facilitate reader comprehension and make the
manuscript more readable. Furthermore, we recommend prac
tices for upholding academic discourse integrity through lan
guage clarity and ethical publication. Through these objectives,
the paper aspires to standardize review practices and improve
December 13, 2024
the quality and societal impact of published research.
This structured approach includes the following key contri
butions.
• Comprehensive explanation of research, research pro
cesses, methodologies, research papers, and the reviewing
and publishing process.
• Systematic model to evaluate research innovation and
rigor, ensuring meaningful contributions to the field.
• Criteria for organizing manuscripts to improve coherence
and ease of assessment.
• Practical guidance for enhancing clarity and accuracy in
academic communication.
• Aframework for upholding research integrity, promoting
accurate citation, and preventing unethical practices.
• Detailed discussion on the components of a research pa
per, adhering to the four-dimensional evaluation model by
providing guidelines and principles.
As shown in Figure 1, the remainder of this paper is orga
nized as follows. The literature review and related work are dis
cussed in Section 2. A brief introduction to research, research
types, research papers, and journals and publishers is presented
in Section 3. Section 4 explains in detail the key dimensions
for paper preparation and evaluation. Based on the key dimen
sions explained in the previous section, Section 5 illustrates the
essential components of a research paper adhering to the key
dimensions discussed in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 draws the
conclusions.
2. Related Work
Existing research highlights significant efforts to improve
methodological consistency, technical writing quality, and eth
ical rigor in academic publication practices. Studies under
score the importance of establishing standard frameworks that
address disciplinary variability, particularly in social sciences,
engineering, and biomedical research.
Aleksandrov, in [11], provided a comprehensive guide on the
process of writing and publishing scientific manuscripts, par
ticularly in the field of cerebrovascular diseases. In the paper,
detailed instructions are provided on drafting each section of a
manuscript, from the introduction and methods to the results
and discussion, emphasizing clear, concise, and ethical lan
guage. The paper underscores the importance of internal review
and statistical consultation in avoiding common pitfalls, such
as over-interpreting results and inappropriate statistical analy
sis. There is, however, a potential weakness in the paper, where
its focus on clinical research may limit its applicability to other
scientific fields.
Feld et al., in [12], investigated the impact of quality writ
ing on the perceived academic quality of economic papers. The
researchers compared original and language-edited versions of
PhD student papers in a randomized experiment involving 30
economists and 18 writing experts. The topics covered include
the methodology of the experiment, expert evaluation criteria,
and statistical analysis. The strength of the paper is its rigor
ous experimental design, the use of professional editors, and
the demonstration that better writing significantly increases the
perceived quality and acceptance chances of academic papers.
However, the focus on economics papers and the specific sam
ple of PhD students from New Zealand universities result in
limited generalizability.
A comprehensive guide aimed at helping novice researchers
write scientific articles was presented by Ecarnot et al. in [13].
The paper offers practical tips to make the writing process more
accessible, providing detailed instructions for structuring each
manuscript section using the IMRAD format. The topics dis
cussed are the importance of preparation, selecting a target jour
nal, and adhering to guidelines specific to each journal. This pa
per emphasizes the importance of clarity and conciseness in sci
entific writing with its straightforward, step-by-step approach
and practical advice tailored for beginners. However, the guide
may be too basic for experienced researchers seeking advanced
techniques and may not address challenges in highly special
ized fields.
The authors in [7] explored the application of AI in automat
ing various aspects of the academic publishing process, includ
ing journal recommendation, initial quality control, reviewer
selection, and post-publication quality assessment. The paper
focused on the current state of AI tools in these fields, their ef
fectiveness, and their challenges. In addition to reviewing exist
ing AI tools and their applications and analyzing their potential
benefits and limitations, the authors presented a comprehensive
assessment of existing AI tools and their applications. There
are, however, some weaknesses in the paper, including the lack
of discussion of ethics and biases associated with AI-assisted
peer review.
Rosenfeldt et al., in [15], provided a detailed guide for re
searchers, particularly in the medical field, on writing and pub
lishing scientific papers. The paper gives practical advice on
structuring a manuscript, from the introduction to the conclu
sion, emphasizing the importance of clear, concise writing. Be
sides choosing an appropriate journal, handling revisions, and
dealing with rejections, it also covers practical issues. In this
paper, novice writers will find help through step-by-step in
structions, valuable tips, and encouragement. However, its pri
mary focus on the medical field may limit its applicability to
researchers from other fields.
Arrom et al., in [16], explained a detailed guide on the struc
ture and composition of original scientific articles, emphasizing
the IMRAD format (Introduction, Methods, Results, and Dis
cussion). Practical advice is provided in each section of an ar
ticle, from the title and abstract to the references, and common
pitfalls were discussed. The paper offers clear, step-by-step in
structions and practical tips that enhance the clarity and impact
of scientific writing. A potential weakness is that it may be too
general for experienced researchers looking for advanced writ
ing techniques.
Van et al. in [17] provided comprehensive guidance on writ
ing literature review papers (LRPs), emphasizing the impor
2
HolisticApproachtoResearch
5.EssentialComponentsofaPaper
AdheringtheKeyDimensions
5.14Biography
5.13Appendix(Optional)
5.12References
5.11Acknowledgment(Optional)
5.10ConclusionandFutureWork
5.9Discussion
5.8Results
5.7Methodology
5.6RelatedWork
5.5Introduction
5.4Keywords
5.3Abstract
5.2AuthorsandAffiliation
5.1Title
4.KeyDimensionsforPaperPreparationandEvaluation
4.4EthicsinPublishing
4.3WritingStyle
4.2ContentStructure
4.1TechnicalContent
3.Research
3.9EditorialBoard
3.8PeerReviewProcess
3.7SubmissionProcess
3.6QualityofJournals
3.5Publishers
3.4PublishingVenues
3.3Papers
3.2Types
3.1Definition
2.RelatedWork
1. Introduction
Figure1:Theorganizationalstructureofthepaper.
tanceofaddingvaluebeyondmerelysummarizingexistinglit
erature. ItcoverstherationaleforwritingLRPs,differenttypes
ofLRPs,methodologiesforselectingpapers,andhowtostruc
turethereview. InadditiontoitsdetaileddiscussionofLRPs’
addedvalue, thepaperprovidespracticaladviceonmethodol
ogyandstructureandincludesexamplesinthefieldof trans
portation. Thepaper lacksastandardizedtemplatefornovice
writers,whichmightmakeitchallengingforthoseseekingspe
cific,field-specificadvice.
The authors in [18] presented a comprehensive guide
on the principles and practices of peer-reviewing scientific
manuscripts.Thereisafocusontheethicalconsiderationsin
volved inconductinga thoroughandconstructive review, as
wellastheresponsibilitiesofreviewers. Topicsdiscussedin
3
clude the importance of fairness, confidentiality, and integrity
in the review process and practical tips for evaluating research
quality, writing style, and ethical compliance. Among the most
vital aspects of the paper are its detailed guidelines on reviewer
conduct and its emphasis on the dual role of reviewers as ad
vocates for authors and journals. A potential weakness of the
paper is that it may not address the specific challenges faced
by reviewers in highly specialized fields, which could limit its
applicability to a broader audience.
Although existing research has made significant strides in
improving methodological consistency, technical writing qual
ity, and ethical rigor, several limitations remain. In many stud
ies, particular disciplines, such as clinical research, were the
focus, limiting their generalizability to other fields. Further,
while some papers provide detailed guidelines on manuscript
preparation and review processes, they usually lack a unified
framework that addresses the diverse needs of different aca
demic disciplines. Furthermore, ethical considerations, biases
in AI-assisted peer review, and the lack of standardized tem
plates for novice writers require further investigation and de
velopment.
To address the aforementioned challenges, this paper intro
duces a structured four-dimensional framework encompassing
technical content, structural coherence, writing precision, and
ethical integrity. This comprehensive model is designed to stan
dardize review and publication processes across various dis
ciplines, ensuring that manuscripts are evaluated consistently
and transparently. By providing specific guidelines for each
dimension, the framework helps authors prepare high-quality
manuscripts that meet rigorous academic standards, thereby
enhancing the reliability and reproducibility of research out
comes. Additionally, the framework promotes ethical publish
ing practices and reduces review bias, contributing to more
trustworthy and credible academic literature.
3. Research: Processes, Types, Papers, Reviewing, and
Publishing
3.1. Definition
Research is a deliberate and organized activity that is carried
out to discover new knowledge, refine existing knowledge, or
investigate a problem [20]. The research process involves for
mulating hypotheses, analyzing data, and drawing conclusions
based on the results [21]. The validity and reliability of the re
search are ensured by following established methods. In addi
tion to advancing academic knowledge, research contributes to
solving real-world problems in science, engineering, medicine,
and social sciences.
Research begins with the identification of a problem or a
knowledge gap [22]. This first step is crucial because it de
termines the direction for the rest of the research. Following
this, hypotheses are developed, which provide a framework for
testing predictions. A hypothesis might suggest that a new Ma
chine Learning (ML) model would be more effective in object
detection than the current models. These hypotheses lead to
specific research questions that guide the study’s focus and ob
jectives.
Research requires data collection as a fundamental step. Sur
veys, experiments, observations, and archival research can be
used to gather data depending on the field and nature of the
study [23]. We can, for example, collect data for object detec
tion by scraping images from the web, taking photos, and then
manually or semi-automatically annotating them. Environmen
tal scientists study the impacts of pollution on ecosystems by
collecting data on air and water quality. Social scientists use
surveys and interviews to gather information about human be
havior and social trends.
After collecting data, patterns, correlations, and trends must
be analyzed. The accuracy and reliability of this analysis are
often ensured by using statistical tools and software [24]. En
gineering data analysis, for instance, might involve testing ma
terials for strength and durability under different conditions to
determine their suitability for construction. Psychologists use
statistical analysis to determine factors that influence mental
health outcomes.
The interpretation of results is one of the most critical steps
in research. In addition to comparing their findings with the
original hypotheses, researchers discuss the implications of
their findings. Through this interpretation, new insights can be
gained and advancements can be made in the field. For exam
ple, interpreting a clinical trial’s results might reveal the effec
tiveness of a new treatment, which medical practitioners may
adopt.
Researchers follow methods and ethical standards to ensure
their work’s validity and reliability. The peer review process is
a common practice in which other experts in the field evaluate
a study’s methodology and conclusions before it is published.
This process ensures that the research meets high standards by
identifying potential flaws. Study replication is another vital
aspect, which confirms the reliability of the results by repeating
the study and obtaining the same results.
Many advancements and practical applications have resulted
from research in various fields. Developing new materials
and energy sources are examples of technological innovations
sparked by research in science. Engineers have created safer
and more efficient structures and systems through research. The
advancement of medical research has led to breakthroughs in
treatments and vaccines that have improved public health. In
addition to providing valuable insights into human behaviour
and societal issues, social science research has influenced poli
cies and practices that seek to address issues such as inequality
and mental health.
Numerous examples of the impact of research can be found.
COVID-19 vaccines developed quickly during the pandemic
and demonstrated how critical medical research is to address
ing global health crises [25]. Climate change research has been
instrumental in influencing policies and practices aimed at sus
tainability. Research in computer science has driven advance
ments in artificial intelligence (AI) that have transformed in
dustries from healthcare to finance, demonstrating the wide
reaching impacts of research [26, 27]. A significant milestone
in machine learning (ML), a branch of artificial intelligence
(AI), has been the development of deep learning (DL) algo
rithms, enabling computers to recognize patterns [28]. The use
4
of AI has enabled breakthroughs in a variety of fields, includ
ing natural language processing (NLP) [29], autonomous driv
ing [30], and healthcare diagnostics [31], demonstrating how
AI can transform a variety of industries.
3.2. Types
There is a great deal of variation in research depending on its
objective, design, and method. In this subsection, we categorize
and describe different types of research according to various
criteria.
As summarized in Table 1, research can be classified accord
ing to various criteria, including purpose, depth of study, type of
data, and methodology. The purpose of research can be catego
rized into theoretical and applied domains. Theoretical research
focuses on generating knowledge that is not immediately appli
cable to practice. In contrast, applied research seeks to address
specific issues by utilizing theoretical frameworks. Applied
research is further classified into technological and scientific
types, each aiming to enhance processes or predict outcomes.
According to the depth of the scope of the research, there are
exploratory, descriptive, explanatory, and correlational research
methods. Descriptive research details characteristics without
probing causality, while exploratory research formulates hy
potheses for under-researched topics. Correlational research
examines relationships between variables, while explanation re
search identifies cause-and-effect relationships.
Moreover, research can be classified according to the type
of data used. While qualitative research uses non-numerical
data to extract meaning, quantitative research uses numerical
data for statistical analysis. According to the degree of variable
manipulation, research can be experimental, non-experimental,
or quasi-experimental. In addition, longitudinal studies, which
track changes over time, and cross-sectional studies, which as
sess phenomena at a specific moment, differ in timing.
The various types of research play a crucial role in advancing
knowledge and addressing real-world problems. Scholars and
practitioners can develop practical solutions to complex issues
using multiple research methods.
Research results provide insight and evidence that drive fur
ther studies and innovations, resulting in scientific advance
ment. Disseminating these results through journal publications,
conferences, and other platforms as research papers allows the
broader scientific community to review, replicate, and build
upon them. By effectively disseminating research, practition
ers, policymakers, and other stakeholders can benefit directly
from new knowledge, helping bridge the gap between research
and application.
3.3. Research Papers
An academic research paper communicates the results of re
search, experiments, or theoretical studies. Research papers
advance knowledge by sharing insights and findings with the
scholarly community. Research papers follow a strict struc
ture, typically including i) Abstract, ii) Introduction, iii) Re
lated Work, iv) Methodology, v) Results, vi) Discussion, and
vii) Conclusion.
The structured approach ensures clarity and allows readers
to follow the research process and understand the findings in
depth. The term ‘paper’ refers to a document that has been
accepted through peer review and published, while the term
‘manuscript’ is used for a document that is in preparation or
review.
Researchers publish research papers, both personal and pro
fessional, for several reasons. The publishing process estab
lishes the researcher as an expert in their field and builds their
academic reputation. Many academic institutions and research
organizations evaluate publications when evaluating promo
tions, tenure, and grant applications. A researcher with a strong
publication record in high-impact journals is more likely to re
ceive funding for future projects.
In addition to fostering scientific collaborations with re
searchers worldwide, publishing papers can result in financially
rewarding partnerships. For instance, an article on renewable
energy technologies might attract the attention of industry part
ners looking to develop sustainable technologies.
In addition to disseminating new findings, research papers
facilitate discussion on unresolved issues. They increase visi
bility and allow a broader audience to engage with the findings,
influencing policy and practice. Public health interventions, for
example, can inform government policies and improve commu
nity health.
As a result of their published work, researchers can connect
with leading experts and scholars, enhancing their intellectual
growth and academic network. Encouraging critical thinking
and deep engagement with topics fosters continuous learning.
For instance, research ideas and methodologies can be inspired
by engaging with peer-reviewed literature.
The public can benefit from papers that provide insight
into complex topics and contribute to evidence-based decision
making. For example, climate change research can raise aware
ness and lead to sustainable action. The research publica
tion process includes communicating findings, establishing the
credibility of ideas through peer review, and supporting profes
sional growth, funding opportunities, and collaborations.
As presented in Table 2, there are several different types of
research papers, each serving a different purpose:
AnAnalytical Paper breaks a topic into parts to evaluate and
draw new conclusions based on evidence. Climate change ana
lytical papers, for instance, assess the relative effects of green
house gas emissions, deforestation, and industrial activities on
global warming.
An Argumentative or Persuasive Paper presents a clear
thesis and supports it with evidence to convince readers of a
particular stance. For example, a persuasive paper may argue
for implementing renewable energy policies using data on en
vironmental benefits, economic feasibility, and long-term sus
tainability.
An Experimental Paper documents original experiments,
describing methods, results, and analysis. This type of paper
is common in the natural sciences. For example, a biology pa
per might explain the experimental setup, control and treatment
groups, and statistical analysis of the results of a study on the
effects of a new drug on cell growth.
5
Table1: IntegratedComparisonofResearchTypes
Classification
Metric
Type of Re
search
Purpose Methodology DataType Outcome
Purpose Theoretical
Research
Generate new con
cepts
Literature re
view, model
ing
Qualitative Formulationofnewtheories
andframeworks.
Applied Re
search
Solving specific
problems
Experimental
or observa
tional
Quantitative
or Qualita
tive
Development of practical
solutionsandinterventions.
DepthofScope
Exploratory
Research
Gain insights on
under-researched
topics
Qualitative
methods
Qualitative Identification of new re
search questions and hy
potheses.
Descriptive
Research
Define characteris
ticsofphenomena
Surveys, ob
servations
Quantitative Detailed understanding of
phenomena and their char
acteristics.
Explanatory
Research
Establish cause-and
effectrelationships
Experimental
studies
Quantitative Insights intocausalmecha
nismsandrelationships.
Manipulationof
Variables
Experimental
Research
Test hypotheses un
dercontrolledcondi
tions
Randomized
trials
Quantitative Validatedconclusionsabout
causalrelationships.
Non
Experimental
Research
Observe phenomena
innaturalsettings
Observational
studies
Qualitative
orQuantita
tive
Insightswithout manipula
tion, enhancing ecological
validity.
TimeFrame Longitudinal
Research
Monitor changes
overtime
Cohort stud
ies
Quantitative Insights into trends and
long-termeffects.
Cross
Sectional
Research
Observesubjectsata
specificpointintime
Surveys Quantitative Snapshot of current condi
tionsandvariables.
Sourcesof
Information
Primary Re
search
Collect datadirectly
fromthesource
Interviews or
surveys
Qualitative Rich,firsthandinsights into
specificphenomena.
Secondary
Research
Usedatacollectedby
otherresearchers
Literature re
view
Qualitative
orQuantita
tive
Synthesisofexistingknowl
edgeandidentifyinggaps.
Inference
Deductive
Research
Derivesspecificcon
clusions from gen
erallaws
Theoretical
analysis
Qualitative Application of theories to
predictoutcomesinspecific
cases.
InductiveRe
search
Generates new the
ories fromobserva
tions
Observational
studies
Qualitative Development of new theo
riesbasedonempiricalpat
terns.
Hypothetical
deductive
research
Tests hypotheses
throughdeduction
Experimental
studies
Quantitative Confirmation or refutation
oftheoreticalpropositions.
AReviewPapersummarizesandcriticallyevaluatesprevi
ousresearchtoprovideacomprehensiveoverviewofaspecific
topic. Areviewpaperhelps identifytrends, gaps, andfuture
directionsinresearch.Forexample, itispossibletosynthesize
findingsfromvariousstudiesonMLalgorithms,applications,
andethicalconsiderationsinareviewpaperonAI.
ASurveyPaperfocusesonsynthesizingtrendsanddevel
opmentsacrossaresearchfield,oftenidentifyinggapsforfu
tureexploration[32].Forinstance,Asurveypaperincomputer
sciencemightexaminerecentadvancesincybersecurity,high
lightingemergingthreatsandinnovativedefences. Thediffer
encebetweenareviewpaperandasurveypaperisthatareview
papercriticallyevaluatesandsynthesizesexistingresearchona
topic. Incontrast,asurveypapersummarizesandprovidesan
overviewofdevelopmentswithinaspecificarea.
ADefinitionPaperexplainsaconceptor theoryindetail,
providingmultipleperspectivesonthetopic. Inphilosophy,a
definitionpapermight explore the ideaof justice, examining
differentphilosophicalinterpretationsandtheirimplications.
ACompareandContrastPaperanalyzestwoormoresub
jectsbycomparingsimilaritiesanddifferences. This typeof
paper isuseful for highlightingdistinctions andcommonali
ties. Literaturecomparesandcontrastspapers; forexample,
twonovelswithdifferentculturalbackgroundsmightbecom
6
pared based on themes and narrative techniques.
3.4. Publishing Venues
There are two ways in which research papers can be pub
lished: peer-reviewed or non-reviewed. In peer-reviewed publi
cations, e.g., scholarly journals or conference proceedings, ex
perts (peers) in the field rigorously evaluate the paper’s qual
ity, methodology, and contributions before it is accepted. Con
versely, non-reviewed publications are available online through
repositories, such as arXive, allowing them to be disseminated
more quickly, but without the same level of scrutiny and vali
dation as peer-reviewed publications.
The following are several possible venues where a paper can
be published.
• In Scholarly journals, peer-reviewed articles are pub
lished either in a subscription-based or open-access for
mat. Examples include Elsevier, IEEE, Nature, Sci
ence, and The Lancet. In subscription-based journals, au
thors are generally exempt from article processing charges
(APCs); however, somejournals, such as those from IEEE,
encourage authors to keep their manuscripts within a spec
ified length, often 6–8 pages, as exceeding this limit incurs
additional page fees. On the other hand, open-access jour
nals, such as IEEE Access, make articles free to the public
but require authors to cover the article processing charge.
In recent years, some subscription-based journals have be
gun offering authors an open-access option to make their
research more accessible to the public.
• Special Issue (SI) in Scholarly Journals; are collections
of articles focused on a specific theme or topic within a
journal’s scope. Guest Editors curate these issues with
their expertise. An issue of a special issue highlights
emerging trends, significant advances, or comprehensive
reviews of a particular topic. Contributions from lead
ing researchers provide a platform for in-depth exploration
and discussion. A special issue can draw attention to
cutting-edge research and foster scholarly collaboration,
enhancing the journal’s impact.
• Conference Proceedings are collections of research pre
sented, often in volumes or as digital formats for dissemi
nation across disciplines. As a result of these proceedings,
researchers can share preliminary or ongoing research, re
ceive peer feedback, and increase their visibility within the
scientific community. Several conferences have partner
ships with reputable journals, encouraging authors to sub
mit extended versions of their accepted papers for pub
lication. Typically, these extended submissions require
additional findings, enhanced analyses, or expanded dis
cussions to differentiate them from the original confer
ence paper. Academic publishers such as Springer and
IEEE frequently publish these proceedings, ensuring that
research is accessible to a broader audience and archival
in respected academic databases. In this way, conferences
contribute to advancing knowledge and lay the foundation
for further peer-reviewed journal publications.
• Workshops are often encouraged to be the first step for
young researchers since they provide a supportive envi
ronment for early-stage research presentations and dis
cussions. Professionals interested in specific, niche top
ics gather at workshops within larger conferences to share
feedback and suggestions. Authors can refine their find
ings in a workshop based on peer feedback before submit
ting them to a full conference. Additional data, findings, or
extended analysis are often added after a conference pre
sentation, enabling the work to evolve and ultimately be
published. With this stepwise approach, young researchers
can achieve visibility, improve the rigor of their work, and
increase their chances of publishing in prestigious jour
nals.
• Online repositories like arXiv provide authors with a
platform to share their research findings with the scien
tific community quickly. Unlike traditional journals, these
repositories allow for immediate dissemination, which is
especially beneficial in rapidly evolving fields. Many re
searchers use these platforms to gain visibility and feed
back on their work, increasing the accessibility and en
gagement of their research. Journals permit submissions
that have previously appeared in such repositories, allow
ing authors to share preliminary findings publicly before
formal peer review. However, certain journals may view
prior online availability as pre-publication and disallow
submissions that have been shared in repositories. As a
result of this balance, authors can disseminate their work
widely while keeping options open for later publication in
journals.
• Books and Monographs offer a comprehensive way to
present research in-depth, making them ideal for exten
sive studies or multi-faceted projects. Unlike journal arti
cles or conference papers, these are usually published as
standalone works or as chapters in edited volumes. In
addition to contributing to scholarly discourse, they al
low researchers to present substantial analysis, theory, or
methodology discussions that may not fit within shorter
publication formats.
• Dissertations and Theses are required publications for
obtaining a master’s or doctoral degree, respectively.
These works showcase a student’s research abilities, pro
vide new insights into their field of study, and are typically
subjected to rigorous review by a panel of academic advi
sors. Upon successful defence, these documents become
part of university collections, are accessible for future ref
erence, and may also serve as foundational material for
subsequent journal articles.
• The goal of institutional repositories is to archive and
disseminate research produced by university faculty, stu
dents, and researchers. By providing open access to schol
arly outputs, these repositories increase the visibility and
accessibility of academic work. They showcase a univer
sity’s research achievements by providing free access to
7
TypeofPaper Scope Objective Methods AverageNumberof
Pages
AnalyticalPaper Specific topic or is
sue
Evaluate and draw
new conclusions
basedonevidence
Literature review,
dataanalysis 10-15
Argumentative or
PersuasivePaper
Specificstanceonan
issue
Convincereadersofa
particularstance
Literature review,
logical reasoning,
evidence presenta
tion
8-12
Experimental Pa
per Originalexperiments Document methods,
results,andanalysis
Experimental setup,
data collection, sta
tisticalanalysis
12-20
ReviewPaper Comprehensive
overviewofatopic
Summarizeandcrit
icallyevaluateprevi
ousresearch
Literature review,
synthesisoffindings 15-30
SurveyPaper Trends anddevelop
mentsinafield
Identifygapsandfu
ture research direc
tions
Literature review,
trendanalysis 15-25
DefinitionPaper Conceptortheory
Explain in detail,
provide multiple
perspectives
Literature review,
theoreticalanalysis 8-12
CompareandCon
trastPaper Twoormoresubjects Analyze similarities
anddifferences
Comparative analy
sis,literaturereview 10-15
PositionPaper Specificissueorpol
icy
Presentanopinionor
stance
Literaturereview,ar
gumentation 6-10
WhitePaper Specific problemor
issue
Informandpersuade
stakeholders
Case studies, data
analysis 10-20
Cause and Effect
Paper
Specificeventorphe
nomenon
Analyze causes and
effects
Literature review,
dataanalysis 8-12
Report Specificevent or re
searchfindings
Present findings and
recommendations
Datacollection,anal
ysis,presentation 10-20
Interpretative Pa
per
Specific text orphe
nomenon
Provide an interpre
tationoranalysis
Literature review,
theoreticalanalysis 8-12
Table2:ComparisonofDifferentTypesofResearchPapers
scholarlypublications,datasets,andthesesandfacilitate
globalknowledgesharing.
•Duringasymposium,researcherspresenttheirfindingson
aparticularsubjectorwithinaspecializedfield. Experts
candiscussemergingtrendsandissuesduringthesegath
erings,whichcanbestandaloneeventsorpartof larger
conferences.Researcherscanrefinetheirworkbeforesub
mittingittopeer-reviewedvenuesbyparticipatinginsym
posia,whichprovidevaluablenetworkingandfeedback
opportunities.
•Colloquiumareacademic seminarsheldat universities
whereresearchers, students,andfacultypresent theiron
goingwork.Theseeventsfosteracademicexchange,pro
vidingaforumforpeerfeedbackandconstructivediscus
sionthat canhelpshapefutureresearchdirections. Re
searchersusecolloquiasessions torefinetheir ideasand
improve theirpresentationsbeforepresentingat confer
encesorpublishinginjournalswithabroaderaudience.
•Webinarsenableresearcherstopresentanddiscusstheir
workwithaglobalaudienceinreal-time. Disseminating
researchtoadiverseaudiencewithout travel constraints
isparticularlyvaluableinthesesessions.Byencouraging
real-timeinteraction,webinarsenableparticipants toask
questionsandprovideimmediatefeedback,makingthem
idealforknowledgesharingandnetworking.
Researchers prefer journals and conferences among the
above-mentionedvenuestopublishtheirresearchresults. Itde
pendsonseveralfactors,suchastheresearchstage,thedesired
impact,andtheaudienceoftheresearchpaper,whethertosub
mitittoajournaloraconference.
Aconferencepaperoffersanopportunity tosharestill-in
progress research. Newideasanddevelopmentscanbepre
sentedorpreliminaryfindingscanbepresented.Byparticipat
inginconferences,authorscanreceiveearly,informalfeedback
frompeers,whichcanbehelpfulinrefiningandimprovingtheir
researchbeforesubmittingit tojournals. Unlikejournalarti
cles,conferencepaperstypicallycontainlessdetailandfewer
8
references, making them more concise presentations suitable
for oral or poster presentations.
On the other hand, an article in a journal is generally a fully
developed summary of a researcher’s work, including detailed
methodology, data, and comprehensive analysis. In most cases,
it presents original research results, except when it is a review
paper. Data-driven papers require clear conclusions that are ro
bustly supported by the evidence. The thorough nature of jour
nal publications makes them highly regarded in most fields and
considered significant academic achievements.
There are two types of publication options available to jour
nals, including Open Access [33] and Subscription-Based Pub
lishing. An Open Access Journal makes its content freely avail
able to the public, ensuring a wider audience and accessibility.
It is common for authors to pay an article processing charge
(APC) to cover publication costs.
Subscription-based journals restrict access to articles behind
a paywall, with institutions or individuals required to purchase
subscriptions. The journals generate revenue primarily through
subscriptions and offer limited access without institutional or
personal subscriptions. Subscription-based models often offer
rigorous editorial processes and well-established readerships,
whereas open-access models promote broader reach. Depend
ing on their goals, funding availability, and target audience, re
searchers must make their choice.
Academically, publishing in a journal is often considered
more impressive than presenting at a conference. Typically,
journals have rigorous peer-review processes and represent the
top-cited articles in their fields. Citation reports also indicate
that they are referenced more frequently in patents. It is, how
ever, challenging to get published in a quality scholarly journal
due to the low acceptance rates, which increases the chances of
rejection.
Conversely, conferences have distinct advantages. Globally,
conference proceedings are recognized as essential collections
of specialized research. The conferences provide a forum for
scholars to connect, exchange ideas, and collaborate. However,
conferences also have limitations. Even though some confer
ences maintain strict selection processes, their outputs are con
sidered less formal and permanent compared to journal publi
cations.
Professional academic associations, universities, or com
mercial publishers usually publish academic journals. Within
specific academic disciplines, these publishers produce peer
reviewed content that advances knowledge. A few well-known
academic publishers include IEEE, Elsevier, Springer, and Wi
ley, which publish journals in engineering, medicine, and hu
manities. Many academic institutions and organizations sup
port scholarly journals to maintain high academic rigor and pro
mote research dissemination within particular scholarly com
munities.
3.5. Publishers
Publishers produce and distribute printed or digital content
for sale or free, such as books, journals, and software, to the
public. To ensure that their content is of high quality and widely
·105
7.08 · 105
6
4
Number of Publications
2
0
4.23 · 105
2.24 · 105
1.2 · 105
78,716
Publishers
Figure 2: Comparison of Publication Counts Across Major Publishers As of
2024.
accessible, publishers invest time, money, and expertise. From
acquiring manuscripts and managing the editorial process to
marketing and distributing the final product, this role involves a
variety of tasks. Information is made available to a wide audi
ence by publishers, who play a crucial role in spreading knowl
edge and culture.
In addition to facilitating knowledge dissemination, publish
ers provide platforms for researchers to share their findings and
foster scientific discourse. Publishers ensure credibility and re
liability of research by maintaining its integrity through peer
review. In addition to enhancing the visibility and credibility of
the authors, this process advances science and scholarship. In
addition to filtering out flawed research, peer review improves
the quality of published work, thus maintaining high academic
standards.
Some of the largest and most well-known academic publish
ers include:
• Elsevier: Publishes journals in science, technology, and
health. Elsevier is known for its extensive portfolio of
high-impact journals, such as ”The Lancet” and ”Cell.”
• Springer Nature: Specializes in research across multiple
disciplines. It publishes influential journals like ”Nature”
and ”Scientific Reports.”
• Wiley: Covers fields such as science, medicine, and engi
neering. Wiley is recognized for its comprehensive range
of academic and professional resources.
• IEEE:Focuses onelectrical engineering and computer sci
ence. IEEE publishes leading journals and conference pro
ceedings in these fields.
9
Elsevier
Springer Nature
Wiley
Taylor & Francis
IEEE
2932
2496
Figure 3: Comparison of Journal Counts Across Major Publishers As of 2024.
• Taylor &Francis: Publishes across social sciences and hu
manities. It is known for its wide array of journals and
books that cater to diverse academic disciplines.
In order to maximize the reach of research content, these pub
lishers offer both subscription-based access and open access
models. As open access publishing allows unrestricted access
to research findings, it has gained popularity in recent years,
promoting wider dissemination and impact.
By evaluating journals published by various publishers
through its Web of Science Core Collection, Clarivate ensures
they meet high standards for quality and impact. It assesses
editorial rigor and best practices based on 28 criteria, catego
rized into quality and impact metrics. The Web of Science
Master Journal List indexes and makes available journals that
meet these criteria. Through Clarivate’s Publisher Portal, only
publishers can submit journals for evaluation.
3.5.1. Quality of Journals
A wide range of academic journals are published by differ
ent publishers, either focusing on highly specialized fields or
taking an interdisciplinary approach. Through its Web of Sci
ence Core Collection, Clarivate Analytics categorizes journals
into specific indices in order to enhance journal discovery and
research impact, including:
• Science Citation Index Expanded (SCIE); indexes journals
across various scientific disciplines, providing access to
high-impact research. It enables researchers to explore
leading journals in science and technology, supporting
broad visibility and citation tracking for research findings.
• Social Sciences Citation Index (SSCI); covers journals
in the social sciences across 58 fields, ensuring rep
resentation of top-tier research. This index facilitates
cross-disciplinary research and enhances understanding of
global trends and advancements within the social sciences.
• Arts and Humanities Citation Index (AHCI); allows re
searchers to locate relevant papers within arts and human
ities fields with specialized precision. AHCI supports nu
anced and comprehensive coverage in fields where other
citation indices often fall short, emphasizing cultural and
historical research relevance.
3080
1655
Elsevier
Springer Nature
Taylor &Francis
256 Wiley
IEEE
These categories support subject-specific research, enabling
scholars to efficiently locate journals and relevant studies across
disciplines
Clarivate 1 evaluates the quality and influence of journals us
ing a variety of metrics, including:
• Impact Factor (IF); measures the average number of cita
tions received per article published in the journal over a
specific period. The impact factor (IF) of a journal can be
defined as:
IF =
Cy
Ny−1 + Ny−2
,
(1)
where, Cy is the number of citations in current year and
Ny−1 and Ny−2 are the number of published papers in the
past two years.
• Eigenfactor Score; is a reflection of the density of the net
work of citations around the journal using five years of
cited content as cited by the Current Year. Citations are
taken into account both by number and source, so highly
cited sources will have a greater influence on the network
than sources with fewer citations. Journal self-citations are
not included in the Eigenfactor calculation.
• Article Influence Score: Measures the average influence
of a journal’s articles over the first five years after publica
tion.
• Journal Citation Indicator (JCI): A metric introduced to
provide a normalized score across fields, allowing fairer
cross-disciplinary comparisons.
Journals are further grouped into quartiles (Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4)
based on their performance within their subject category:
• Q1: Top 25%ofjournals in the category.
• Q2: 26-50% percentile range.
• Q3: 51-75% percentile range.
• Q4: Bottom 25%.
Being published in a Q1 journal is considered prestigious, indi
cating high impact and scholarly recognition.
3.5.2. Quality of Conferences
It is essential for researchers to attend academic conferences
in order to present findings, network, and keep up with advance
ments in their fields. Prestige and impact can be determined by
the quality and rank of a conference 2. The following factors
can be used by authors to evaluate the quality of a conference:
• Citation Rates: High citation rates of presented papers
suggest impactful research.
1https://jcr.clarivate.com/
2http://www.conferenceranks.com/
10
• Submission Rates: High submission volumes indicate the
conference’s popularity and competitiveness.
• Acceptance Rates: Lower acceptance rates imply a rigor
ous review process, marking the conference as selective.
• Organizer Reputation: Conferences by reputable organiz
ers usually draw quality submissions.
• Research Speaker Track Records: Conferences with well
cited experts signal higher quality.
• Ranking Databases: Platforms like Scimago and CORE
rank conferences based on various metrics.
• Participant Reviews: Feedback from attendees can provide
insights into the event’s organization and quality.
• Similar Conferences: Comparing citation, acceptance
rates, and organizer visibility clarifies the conference’s
rank in the field.
• Institutional Support: Conferences supported by presti
gious institutions are generally credible.
• Expert Opinions: Experts can guide on conference quality
based on their experience and knowledge.
Researchers can use these indicators to align their work with
conferences that represent their desired visibility and rigor.
3.5.3. Submission Process
The choice of venue for manuscript submission is crucial.
Submitting a low-quality manuscript to a high-quality journal
can result in lengthy delays before rejection while submitting a
high-quality manuscript to a low-quality journal diminishes the
research’s impact and value. Therefore, where to submit must
be wisely chosen.
Amanuscript should only be submitted to one journal or con
ference when deciding where to submit it. Multiple submis
sions to multiple journals are unethical and can result in rejec
tion or blacklisting from publishers.
References cited in the manuscript may serve as a starting
point for the authors to select a target journal or conference to
submit a manuscript. Frequently referenced journals can serve
as potential publication venues because they align with the
topic. It can be helpful to consult supervisors or colleagues with
published experience for recommendations on suitable journals
or conferences.
Authors should review potential target journals or confer
ences’ “Aims and Scope” before submitting their articles.
Manuscripts that fit within the scope of a journal or conference
have a better chance of being accepted. Typically, journals and
conferences announce their ”Aims and Scope” on their web
sites.
In case of journals, several tools are available to assist the au
thors in identifying appropriate journals. The Elsevier Journal
Finder Portal 3, the Wiley Journal Finder Portal 4, the Springer
3https://journalfinder.elsevier.com/
4https://journalfinder.wiley.com/search?type=match
Journal Suggester 5, and IEEE Publication Recommender 6 are
effective resources that suggest relevant journals based on the
manuscript’s keywords or abstract.
Lastly, the authors can evaluate key metrics like journal im
pact indicators, review time, and conference rank in case of
a conference submission. The selected journal or conference
should meet the authors’ academic relevance and publication
timelines. These steps can optimize the submission process and
increase the likelihood of publication success.
Nowadays, most journals and conferences have specific web
sites for manuscript submission. However, there may still be
some journals without a dedicated website, requiring authors to
send their manuscripts via email. Online submission systems
are convenient for submitting and tracking manuscripts. For in
stance, IEEE uses the ScholarOne Manuscripts portal7, while
Elsevier journals primarily rely on the Editorial Manager web
site8.
Some journals only require a PDF file of the manuscript to
initiate the review process. Others may request additional mate
rials, such as a cover letter, highlights, and a graphical abstract.
The portals may ask for ORCID9 during the submission pro
cess. ORCID provides a persistent digital identifier (an OR
CID iD) that you own and control, distinguishing you from ev
ery other researcher. You can connect your iD with your pro
fessional information, affiliations, grants, publications, peer re
view, and more. You can use your ID to share your information
with other systems, ensuring you get recognition for all your
contributions, saving you time and hassle, and reducing the risk
of errors.
A Conflict of Interest (CoI) declaration is a critical statement
that authors must include when submitting a manuscript to en
sure transparency and integrity in scholarly publishing. CoI
refers to situations where personal, financial, or professional re
lationships could influence, or appear to influence, the research
process, analysis, or conclusions. Declaring CoI is essential to
maintain the credibility of the research and trust in the publica
tion process. Common types of CoI include financial interests
(e.g., funding, grants, or payments from organizations), non
financial interests (e.g., personal relationships or affiliations),
academic conflicts (e.g., competition among researchers), and
institutional conflicts. Authors are required to disclose any such
conflicts to allow readers and reviewers to evaluate the research
objectively, ensuring that the work remains impartial and unbi
ased.
After submission, Elsevier journals provide a tracking sys
tem for authors to monitor their submitted manuscripts10.
The manuscript submission process for conferences often
utilizes platforms like EDAS11, which is widely used for man
aging the complete conference lifecycle. Authors submit their
5https://journalsuggester.springer.com/
6https://publication-recommender.ieee.org
7https://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/
8https://www.editorialmanager.com/
9https://orcid.org/signin
10https://track.authorhub.elsevier.com/
11https://www.edas.info/
11
manuscripts through EDAS, wherethey are reviewed by experts
in the relevant field. The platform facilitates discussions among
reviewers and program committees to assess submissions and
make decisions regarding acceptance or rejection. Upon accep
tance, authors can complete their registration directly through
EDAS, streamlining the integration of submission and registra
tion processes. Additionally, the platform handles copyright
agreements for accepted papers and supports applications for
travel grants, where applicable. Authors should ensure ad
herence to conference-specific guidelines regarding formatting,
deadlines, and other submission requirements.
3.5.4. Peer Review Process
Prior to publication in an academic journal, peer review is
an essential step in assessing the quality of a manuscript. As a
result, the research is validated, relevant, and contributes to the
field according to established standards.
There are several types of reviews, as follows. In a single
blind review, reviewers remain anonymous to authors, pro
moting impartial feedback. Double-blind reviews enhance
anonymity by concealing both authors’ and reviewers’ iden
tities, thus minimizing bias based on reputation or affiliation.
On the other hand, open peer review discloses both parties’
identities, fostering transparency and accountability. After the
manuscript is accepted, some journals offer additional layers
of scrutiny through post-publication peer review, allowing the
broader academic community to critique and discuss the work,
thus refining its impact and reliability over time. These ap
proaches vary in application based on the journal’s preferences
and the field’s standards.
As illustrated in Figure 4, the stages of peer review typically
include:
• Submission: Researchers submit their manuscripts online
through the journal’s editorial office.
• Initial Screening: The editorial office checks whether the
manuscript aligns with the journal’s scope and meets ba
sic quality standards. Afterwards, the EiC passes the
manuscript to a Senior Editor based on the scalability of
the journal. In some journals, many submissions are re
ceived, and the EiC and Senior Editors cannot handle them
all. Therefore, the Senior Editor sends the manuscript to
an Associate Editor to handle the review process.
• Reviewer Selection: The handling editor assigns the
manuscript to independent experts (peer reviewers) in the
relevant field.
• Review Process: Reviewers evaluate the manuscript based
on technical content, content structure, writing precision,
and ethical considerations.
• Feedback and Decision: Reviewers provide detailed feed
back, e.g., a review report, recommending whether to ac
cept, request minor or major revisions, or reject. Once the
handling editor has reviewed the manuscript and received
the reviewers’ reports, they will make a final decision. In
the case of an accepted decision, a copy of the manuscript
will be sent to the Publishing department.
• Revision and Resubmission: Authors who receive a ’Re
ject and Resubmit’ or ’Revise and Resubmit’ decision
must revise and resubmit their manuscript with a response
letter addressing the comments of the editor and review
ers. The editor passes the revised revision to the reviewers
after reviewing the submitted revision. Once again, the re
viewers review and make a decision. Based on the recom
mendations of the reviewers and handling editor, the EiC
makes the final decision.
By filtering out flawed work and improving quality through
expert feedback, this rigorous evaluation process enhances the
credibility of published research. As a result, it contributes to
the integrity of academic publishing and fosters trust among
scientists. This process is handled by the Editorial board of a
journal, as explained above.
3.6. Editorial Board
Typically, well-known journals have three main boards: the
editorial board, the advisory board, and the peripheral board.
The editorial board includes senior editors, associate editors,
managing editors, copy editors, and peer reviewers. The advi
sory board comprises faculty, senior, and external advisors. The
peripheral board comprises a graphical designer, a platform and
promotions director, and a community outreach director. Due
to the importance of the editorial board, we only explain about
this board.
An editorial board oversees a journal’s academic integrity,
quality, and direction. Their responsibilities include guiding the
peer review process, providing feedback to authors, and ensur
ing that published content aligns with the journal’s standards.
Keeping the journal’s reputation and publishing high-quality
research depends on the editorial board. Depending on how
many submissions are received, an editorial board will have a
certain number of members. Journals with fewer submissions
need fewer editorial boards, e.g., an EiC and reviewers. If the
journal receives too many submissions, several members, in
cluding the editorial office assistant, senior editors, associate
editors, area editors, and reviews, assist the EiC.
EiC selects board members (assistants, senior editors, asso
ciate editors) in consultation with the publisher, e.g., an advi
sory board, to ensure a diverse and expert board. Members are
chosen based on their subject expertise in the journal’s field,
international presence and recognition in academia, and geo
graphic diversity to reflect a global perspective. The editorial
board undergoes periodic revisions every two to three years to
maintain relevance and excellence. This selection process en
sures that the board remains dynamic and capable of addressing
emerging trends and challenges in the field. Typically, the edi
torial board members are as follows.
• Editorial OfficeAssistant: manages communications and
organizes meetings and submissions for the editorial team.
The Editorial Office Assistant handles new submissions,
12
Author EditorialOffice EiC SeniorEditor AssociateEditor Reviewers ProductionTeam
1. Submit
2.DeskReject
3.Pass
DeskEvaluation DeskEvaluation
4.Reject
5.Pass
EiCReview EiCReview
6.Reject
7.Pass
SeniorEditorReview SeniorEditorReview
8.ReviewRequest
9.ReviewResponse
PeerReview PeerReview
10.Decision
11.Accept
12.Reject
13.RevisionRequest
DecisionProcess DecisionProcess
Go‘1. Submit’
IfRevisionRequested: IfRevisionRequested:
15.FinalFiles
16.CopyrightTransfer
17.CopyrightTransfer
18.Proof
19.Proof
IfAccepted: IfAccepted:
Figure4:PeerReviewandPublishingProcessofPapers 13
ensuring every manuscript adheres to basic technical writ
ing principles. For academic integrity, they perform simi
larity checks and plagiarism screenings and verify that the
submission falls within the journal’s scope. Submissions
that meet such conditions will be passed to the EiC. Oth
erwise, they will be returned to the authors.
• EiC: oversees the editorial board and makes final deci
sions regarding article submissions. While representing
the journal in external matters, the EiC ensures the jour
nal adheres to scientific, technical, and ethical standards.
When the EiC receives a manuscript, it will undergo an
initial review to ensure it is technically accurate, well
written, and aligned with the journal’s focus. Manuscripts
that meet these criteria are forwarded to a Senior Editor for
further evaluation based on the senior editor’s interests. In
any case, the EIC may allow the authors to address the
comments and resubmit. In any other case, the authors are
not allowed to submit this article to this journal anymore,
and it will be rejected.
• Senior Editors: oversee the overall editorial process and
make key decisions regarding article acceptance. Addi
tionally, they coordinate the work of Associate Editors and
oversee major editorial initiatives. Senior Editors evalu
ate manuscript quality, technical content, and writing style
when they receive a manuscript. Manuscripts that do not
meet the required standards are rejected and returned to
the authors. Senior Editors assign manuscripts to Asso
ciate Editors based on their expertise and the manuscript’s
topic if they meet the standards.
• Associate Editors: specialize in specific subject areas and
oversee peer review of manuscripts under their responsi
bility. Their role is to ensure that the content aligns with
the journal’s scope and standards. Associate Editors invite
multiple experts to review manuscripts, typically gather
ing three to five reviews. Following the receipt of the nec
essary reviews, the Associate Editor makes a decision on
whether to accept, request minor revisions, request major
revisions, or reject the manuscript. The decision is then
forwarded to the Editor-in-Chief (EiC), who makes the fi
nal decision based on the reviews and the Associate Edi
tor’s recommendation.
• Guest Editors: are invited to oversee Special Issues (SI)
or thematic sections of the journal. Typically, they are ex
perts in a particular field and are responsible for solicit
ing manuscripts, managing peer reviews, and making ini
tial decisions on submissions. To ensure that the SI main
tains the journal’s standards and scope, Guest Editors work
closely with the EiC and Senior Editors. Thanks to their
contributions, fresh perspectives and cutting-edge research
are crucial to the journal.
• Reviewers:
are experts who evaluate submitted
manuscripts to ensure their quality, relevance, and
academic integrity. The reviewers are normally given
three to four weeks to assess a manuscript from various
Technical 
Content
Structural 
Coherence
Writing 
Precision
Ethical 
Integrity
Figure 5: Four Key Dimensions for Paper Preparation and Evaluation
perspectives, such as the technical content, the structure,
the style of writing, and ethical considerations. An
Associate Editor receives a detailed review report from
the reviewers, including feedback and recommendations.
A manuscript is accepted, rejected, or revised (minor or
major revision) based on the reviewers’ evaluation.
After acceptance, a manuscript is sent to the publication team
for review. As soon as the authors receive notification of accep
tance, they must submit the final version of their manuscript.
Some journals immediately publish the final files online, e.g.,
early access. Afterwards, the publication team will send the
corresponding author a copyright transfer form. Authors will
be asked to pay for additional page fees and open access pa
pers if they are open access. Next, the publication team formats
and typesets the manuscript to align with the journal’s style. A
proof, including the final formatted version, is sent to the au
thors along with any formatting questions they may have. Ei
ther the authors will answer the questions or confirm the proof.
After the manuscript is confirmed, it is assigned a volume and
page number and published online. On the designated publica
tion date, it will be included in an issue of the journal.
The next section will discuss the key aspects of writing a
high-quality manuscript for publication in top journals that are
also considered by the EiC, Senior Editor, Associate Editors,
and Reviewers while evaluating a manuscript.
4. Four-Key Dimensions for Paper Preparation and Evalu
ation
To ensure the quality and scientific integrity of a manuscript,
as presented in Figure 5, reviewers evaluate it according to four
main dimensions, including a) technical content, b) structural
coherence, c) writing precision, and d) ethical consideration.
Therefore, authors should consider these four key dimensions
when preparing a manuscript.
First, reviewers assess the methodology and results of the re
search in terms of originality, accuracy, and validity. It involves
determining whether the problem statement, objectives, and
technical contributions are novel and significant, whether the
methods are appropriate and rigorously applied, and whether
the results can be replicated and replicated.
14
Second, content structure is assessed to ensure all manuscript
sections are logically connected, such as the Abstract, Intro
duction, Methods, Results, and Discussion. A well-structured
manuscript allows readers to follow the research narrative and
its progression easily.
The third dimension examines writing structure, evaluating
the writing’s clarity, grammar, and conciseness to ensure the
manuscript is properly formatted, correctly referenced, and free
of ambiguities. Research findings must be communicated in
a clear and precise manner. A manuscript should be free of
grammatical errors, use technical terms correctly, and adhere to
the journal’s style guidelines.
Finally, there are ethical considerations to consider when
writing a manuscript. Reviewers ensure proper citation prac
tices and uphold ethical standards in academic publishing by
meticulously evaluating manuscripts. Authors should not im
properly use ideas, data, or materials from previous publica
tions or from online sources without proper acknowledgment.
Akey component of this process is ensuring that others’ words,
figures, tables, and algorithms are properly referenced so that
any form of plagiarism or misrepresentation can be prevented.
Taking all of these factors into consideration ensures that
the manuscript meets high academic standards and contributes
meaningful insights to the field of research. To maintain the
scientific record’s integrity, reviewers rigorously evaluate tech
nical content, content structure, and writing quality. In addition
to improving the authors’ work, this process contributes reliable
and valuable knowledge to the broader academic community.
We will detail the four key dimensions of preparing and eval
uating research papers in the following subsections.
4.1. Technical Content
The technical content of a research manuscript should clearly
articulate the central scientific inquiry by including five essen
tial elements: 1) the problem statement, 2) objectives, 3) con
tributions, 4) significance, and 5) merit. The problem statement
answers ”why” by explaining the necessity of the research. The
objectives clarify ”what” the research aims to accomplish. Con
tributions address ”how” the research will be conducted, outlin
ing methods and approaches. Significance identifies the advan
tages of the research compared to the related work, while merit
emphasizes its value, originality, and potential advancements
within the field. Together, these elements provide a compre
hensive framework for understanding the research’s purpose,
approach, and significance.
Weexplain the five elements as follows.
The manuscript begins with an articulated problem state
ment, defining the specific issue or research gap to be ad
dressed. It involves thoroughly reviewing existing literature to
identify inadequacies or unexplored areas that require further
study. It is essential to understand the research gap because it
determines the relevance and contribution of the manuscript. In
a study on renewable energy, for instance, it might be found
that solar panels perform better under varying weather condi
tions than normal conditions.
The objectives should be articulated immediately after the
problem statement to clarify how the research addresses iden
tified gaps in the field. This sequence, problem statement, lit
erature review, research gap, and objectives—create a logical
flow. The literature review establishes what has been studied,
identifies gaps, and provides a basis for the research need. The
objectives then define the study’s purpose, whether it involves
developing a new framework, suggesting a method, or solving
the identified problem, ensuring the study’s contributions are
clear and purpose-driven
Next, the technical approach to solving the problem should
be clearly outlined, detailing the problem’s formulation and
specifying if a new algorithm or model has been developed.
These technical contributions, comprising the novel core ideas
of the research, should be distinct from existing work and form
the foundation of the study. Additionally, the methodology
should include a robust evaluation process that benchmarks the
proposed solution against existing models, using empirical re
sults, statistical analyses, or experimental validation. This ap
proach demonstrates the model’s strengths in performance met
rics like accuracy, efficiency, or scalability. For instance, a new
machine learning model for image recognition could be com
pared to existing models to highlight its improvements in accu
racy and speed.
The manuscript must present comprehensive results beyond
reporting outcomes to substantiate claims of superiority. Fur
thermore, it should explain the significance and implications
of the proposed model. Results should be detailed enough to
demonstrate how the proposed approach effectively addresses
the research problem based on the problem statement, objec
tive, and technical contributions. Additionally, these results
should be positioned in the context of related work, demonstrat
ing the model’s advantages through relevant evaluation met
rics, such as accuracy, efficiency, scalability, or robustness.
The comparative analysis should highlight the model’s unique
strengths and demonstrate its practical value and potential for
advancement.
The manuscript should then comprehensively report the mer
its of the research, specifically addressing the practical appli
cations and potential impact of the findings. The purpose is to
demonstrate the model or framework’s usefulness and broader
significance across the scientific community and potential in
dustry applications in real-world situations. By exploring these
aspects, the authors provide readers with a clear understand
ing of how their research could drive advancements in specific
fields or lead to societal benefits. For instance, research on a
novel drug delivery system might emphasize its potential to en
hance patient outcomes in managing chronic diseases, offering
improved therapeutic efficiency and reduced side effects. A new
machine learning algorithm for predictive maintenance could
also be highlighted for its potential to reduce operational costs
and prevent equipment failures. Discussions of this type add
depth to the manuscript by illustrating the broader value of the
research beyond its theoretical contributions.
In summary, the technical content of a research paper forms
the core of the evaluation process. Reviewers assess several key
elements, including:
15
4.1.1. Problem Statement
A problem statement in a research paper identifies a gap or
need in the current knowledge or practice. This is the heart of
the research: identifying what’s missing or what needs to be
addressed.
A good research problem should be clear and concise, easily
understandable, and free of ambiguity. It should be specific and
focused, narrow enough to be manageable but broad enough to
be significant. Furthermore, a good research problem needs to
be researchable, which means that it can be investigated through
the collection and analysis of data. Its significance is vital, ad
dressing a gap that matters to the field and has practical im
portance or theoretical relevance. Innovation is also crucial,
offering new insights, perspectives, or solutions, and it must be
feasible and achievable within the researcher’s time, resources,
and skill constraints.
Reviewers assess the significance and relevance of a problem
statement when assessing its quality. Clarity and precision are
looked for, and the problem must be articulated clearly and pre
cisely. The context and background of the problem are analyzed
to establish its importance. Additionally, reviewers ensure that
the problem statement leads logically to specific research ques
tions. Literature reviews should be scrutinized to ensure the
research adequately supports the problem statement. Finally,
they evaluate the potential impact of solving the problem on the
field or society.
Table 3 outlines seven research gaps that can arise in aca
demic investigations. The Theoretical Gap refers to discrepan
cies between observed phenomena and existing theories, often
requiring further study. Methodological gaps result from insuf
ficient or inadequate methods to answer research questions, ne
cessitating methodological refinements. In the Empirical Gap,
a lack of critical data prevents us from understanding or ex
plaining phenomena; we can fill the data gap by conducting
various studies. A Conceptual Gap arises when definitions or
frameworks are not standardized due to a lack of clarity or con
sensus. In the Temporal Gap, research is outdated, causing dis
continuities in understanding, and emphasizes the need for new
studies that reflect recent advancements. A spatial gap is a lack
of research in specific geographic areas, which limits general
izability and requires the inclusion of underrepresented areas in
research. Last but not least, the Literature Gap reflects a fail
ure to adequately build upon existing knowledge, which can be
mitigated by thorough literature reviews and integrating recent
advances into new research.
Identifying a research gap, formulating a problem statement,
and generating novel ideas to address it are essential steps in
the research process. The primary challenge lies in uncovering
these gaps, defining problem statements, and, more crucially,
developing innovative solutions to address the identified issues.
Researchers begin by extensively examining existing litera
ture to understand what has been done and identify gaps. This
involves reading journal articles, conference papers, and re
views to see where there is a lack of data, conflicting results,
or unexplored areas. Through critical literature analysis, re
searchers pinpoint areas that have not been fully addressed or
where existing solutions are inadequate. This might involve
questions like ”What are the limitations of current methods?”
or ”What issues have not been solved by current research?”
To ensure the problem is significant and relevant to their field,
researchers consider the practical applications of solving this
problem. For instance, improving an existing technology’s effi
ciency in terms of energy consumption. A clear, concise prob
lem statement is then formulated, articulating the gap and the
need for research. It should answer the ”what,” ”why,” and
”how” questions succinctly.
Researchers begin by extensively reviewing existing litera
ture to understand what has been done and identify gaps. This
involves reading journal articles, conference papers, and re
views to see where there is a lack of data, conflicting results,
or unexplored areas. Through critical literature analysis, re
searchers pinpoint areas that have not been fully addressed or
where existing solutions are inadequate. This might involve
questions like ”What are the limitations of current methods?”
or ”What issues have not been solved by current research?” Re
searchers need to ensure that the problem is significant and rel
evant to their field, which often involves considering the practi
cal applications of solving this problem. For instance, improv
ing an existing technology’s efficiency or solving a persistent
health issue. Studying survey papers is beneficial in identifying
a research gap since they analyze and discuss many related top
ics in detail. Furthermore, survey papers often include a section
on Open Research Problems for future researchers.
4.1.2. Objectives
The objectives of a research paper outline the aims the study
intends to achieve. They provide a clear understanding of the
research’s purpose and direction. Well-defined objectives guide
the research design, methodology, and data collection, ensuring
the study stays focused and relevant.
The qualities of a good objective are specificity, measur
ability, achievability, relevance, and timeliness. In addition
to clearly stating what the research aims to accomplish, they
should include criteria for assessing progress and success. Fur
thermore, they must be attainable within the scope of the study,
align with the research problem, and specify a timeline for
achieving them.
The best way to define objectives is to be precise and use
clear, concise language to avoid ambiguity. Instead of focusing
on the activities involved, it’s important to emphasize the re
search outcomes. To refine and improve the objectives, aligning
them with the research problem and hypotheses is important.
Reviewers assess the quality of objectives by checking for
clarity and precision, ensuring they are articulated and unam
biguous. According to the scope and resources of the study,
they evaluate whether the objectives are realistic and achiev
able considering the research problem, questions, and method
ology. Reviewers also consider the significance and impact of
the objectives on the field of study and ensure that they cover
all aspects necessary to address the research problem compre
hensively.
Research papers succeed when their objectives are clear,
guiding the researcher and reviewers through the study’s goals.
16
Type Definition Examples HowtoAddress
TheoreticalGap
Discrepancybetweenexist
ing theoriesormodels and
observedphenomena.
Lack of studies examining
the relationshipbetweenX
andY.
Conductfurtherresearchtotestex
istingtheoriesordevelopnewtheo
reticalframeworks.
MethodologicalGap
Insufficiencyor inadequacy
inthemethodsusedtoinves
tigatearesearchquestion.
Absenceofstudiesutilizing
qualitativemethods in the
field.
Reviewandrefineresearchmethod
ologies, consider alternative ap
proaches, or combinemethods to
addresslimitations.
EmpiricalGap
Missing data or evidence
needed to fullyunderstand
orexplainaphenomenon.
Limited research on the
long-term effects of treat
mentX.
Gatheradditionaldata throughex
periments, surveys,or longitudinal
studiestofillgapsinknowledge.
ConceptualGap
Lack of clarity or consen
sus regardingkeyconcepts
ordefinitionsinthefield.
Variation in definitions of
“success”acrossstudies.
Clarify definitions through
consensus-building efforts,
standardization of terms, or
development of clear conceptual
frameworks.
TemporalGap
Lackofresearchoveracer
tain period, leaving a dis
continuityinunderstanding.
Sparse studies examining
theimpactofrecent techno
logicaladvancements.
Conduct studies to address cur
rentgapsandensureresearchkeeps
pacewiththelatestdevelopmentsin
thefield.
SpatialGap
Absence of research in
specificgeographical areas,
limitinggeneralizability.
Fewstudies exploring cul
tural differences in con
sumer behavior across re
gions.
Expandresearchefforts to include
underrepresented geographical ar
eas, ensuring amore comprehen
sive understanding of the phe
nomenon.
LiteratureGap
Failure to address existing
knowledge gaps or build
upon prior research ade
quately.
Neglecting to consider re
cent advancements in the
literaturewhendesigninga
study.
Conduct a thorough literature re
viewto identifyexistinggapsand
builduponprior researchfindings
tocontributetotheadvancementof
knowledge.
Table3:VariousTypesofResearchGaps
4.1.3. TechnicalContributions
The technical contributionsof a researchpaper arewhere
theauthordiscussestheirwork’snovelandsignificantcontribu
tions.Conceptualization,datacuration, formalanalysis, fund
ingacquisition, investigation,methodology, projectmanage
ment, resources, software, supervision, validation, visualiza
tion,writing,reviewing,andeditingarepossibletechnicalcon
tributionsinapaper,aspresentedinfigure6.Contributionsare
essentialsincetheyspecifywhatnewknowledge,methodolo
gies,orframeworkstheresearchoffers.Originality,relevance,
and impact are thedefiningcharacteristicsofgoodcontribu
tions. Theyshouldbeclearlyarticulatedtodemonstratehow
theresearchaddressescurrentgapsinknowledgeor improves
existingmethods. Contributionsarewell-definedbydetailing
theuniqueaspectsoftheworkandprovidingevidencethrough
rigorousexperimentsandvalidation. Thefindingsshouldbe
presented,andwhytheyareessentialandhowtheyadvancethe
fieldshouldbeexplained.
Itismandatoryforeachclaiminthecontributionstobesup
portedbytheoretical, simulation, andexperimental evidence.
Agoodresearchpaperpresentskeyfindings, analyzes them
deeply, anddiscusses thebroader implicationsof thesefind
ings. Toimproveclarity, theresultsarepresentedstructured,
freeofunnecessaryjargon,andoftensupportedbyvisualaids.
Methodologicalanalysisensuresacomprehensiveunderstand
ingof the researchcontext byuncoveringpatternsandrela
tionshipswithin thedata. Thediscussion further integrates
thefindingswithexistingliterature,explainstheircontribution
to thefield, addresses researchquestionsorhypotheses, and
discusses implications, limitations, andfuturedirections. To
gether,theseelementsprovideacoherentnarrativethatnotonly
demonstratestheresearch’simpactandrelevancebutalsooffers
insightsintoitspotentialapplicationsandcontributionstoad
vancingknowledgeinthefield.
Reviewersevaluatecontributionsaccording to their clarity
andoriginality. Byreviewingtheresearchfindings, theyde
terminewhetherthecontributionsaddresssignificantgapsand
problems in thefield. Besides evaluating thecontributions’
broader impact, reviewersalsoconsider their contribution to
currentknowledgeorpractice. Contributions thatmeet these
criteriacanconvincinglydemonstratethevalueandrelevance
oftheresearchtotheacademiccommunity.
Developingnewideasisoneofthemostchallengingaspects
ofresearch. Insummary,weexplainsomesourcesforgenerat
ingnewideas.
•ReadingPublishedPapers: It iscrucialforresearchersto
17
Conceptualization
Data Curation
Formal Analysis
Funding Acquisition
Resources
Project 
Management
Methodology
Software
Supervision
Validation
Investigation
Visualization
Figure 6: Possible Contributions in a Paper
stay on top of recent publications to identify emerging
trends, new methods, and areas of debate or uncertainty.
A comprehensive literature review identifies research gaps
and highlights potential avenues for future research. Many
technical research papers define limitations and future re
search directions, which aid the reader in starting a new
research project. Moreover, survey papers often include
a section for ”Open Research Problems” outlining future
directions.
Editing
Reviewing
Writing
practical challenges that can be addressed through re
search. New research questions and solutions are often
inspired by real-world problems.
• Grant Calls and Research Proposals: Priority areas for re
search are highlighted by funding agencies, and reviewing
these can help align research ideas with available funding.
The identification of these priorities can help ensure that
the research is relevant and has the potential to be funded.
• Critical Thinking: The critical analysis of phenomena and
questioning assumptions can lead to new insights and in
novative solutions. Asking “what if” and ”why not” ques
tions can spark creativity and uncover new perspectives
that may not have been considered before.
• Attending Conferences and Workshops: Conferences,
workshops, seminars, webinars, and speeches are excel
lent opportunities for networking, hearing the latest re
search, and getting ideas from other peers. These events
often provide inspiration and new directions for research.
• Discussions with Experts: Mentors, senior researchers,
and industry experts can help one gain a deeper under
standing of a subject matter than they can from reading
alone. During these discussions, ideas can be refined and
new research opportunities can be identified.
• Interdisciplinary Approaches: Combining methodologies
and concepts from different disciplines can result in novel
ideas by working with researchers from different disci
plines. A cross-pollination of ideas can lead to innovative
research approaches.
• Practical Experience: Engaging in laboratory work, con
ducting experiments, or engaging in fieldwork reveals
• Teaching and Mentorship: Engaging with students and
mentees can lead to fresh, thought-provoking ideas, as
they often ask thoughtful questions. Additionally, teaching
can provide new insights into how research can be applied
in educational settings.
• Industry Collaborations: Using industry partnerships can
provide access to data and problems unavailable in
academia. Through these collaborations, direct commer
cial applications and research can be developed.
• Citizen Science and Public Engagement: Citizen science
projects and public forums can reveal new research areas
based on societal needs. Engaging the public can help
identify community problems.
Integrating these diverse sources can generate innovative and
impactful research ideas that address theoretical and practical
concerns.
4.2. Significance
The significance of a research study refers to its importance
within the existing body of work in the field. By addressing
gaps in prior studies or offering a unique perspective, the pa
per highlights how the research contributes to knowledge ad
vancement. Comparing the study to existing literature can help
18
authors demonstrate how their work stands out regarding inno
vation, relevance, or potential impact. Clearly defining signifi
cance involves explaining why the research questions are worth
exploring and how the findings may influence future research,
theories, and practices. In evaluating significance, reviewers
examine whether the study addresses a relevant problem, pro
vides novel insights, improves existing knowledge frameworks
or opens up new research possibilities.
4.2.1. Merit
Merit emphasizes the study’s direct impact and practical util
ity. There are many aspects to consider here, including the
methodological rigor, the originality, and the potential for real
world applications. Study merit is determined by its contribu
tion to theoretical advancements or practical solutions, making
it worthwhile to academia, industry, or society. Researchers
can illustrate the potential applications of their findings by de
scribing the study’s methodology, results, and implications.
Study merit is evaluated by analyzing the study’s methodolog
ical soundness, validity of its results, and clear demonstration
of practical or theoretical benefits. Moreover, reviewers look at
how well the study addresses its objectives and whether it offers
useful solutions, defining it as an important contribution to the
field.
A rigorous evaluation of these elements ensures that the
manuscript satisfies high academic standards and contributes
meaningful insights to the research community. A thorough
evaluation ensures that published work is of the highest quality
and maintains the integrity of scientific research.
4.3. Content Structure
To communicate ideas effectively and logically, a research
paper must have a clear and logical structure. Conceptually,
every component of a paper must be located correctly. In addi
tion, every paragraph within each section must also be concep
tually arranged correctly. A coherent narrative is created by the
organization and arrangement of each section, the smooth tran
sitions between sections of a paper, and the soft transition be
tween paragraphs of a section. In addition to facilitating reader
comprehension, well-structured papers enhance the overall im
pact of the research.
To maintain clarity and focus, each component of a paper,
such as title, abstract, introduction, main body, and conclusion,
has its own specific structure. An effective title summarizes the
main theme or findings of the research, providing a clear indica
tion of the paper’s content. For example, ”Federated Learning
for Scalable and Real-Time Anomaly Detection in Industrial
Internet of Things”. The addition of ”Federated Learning” clar
ifies the approach and innovation in the study, whereas ”Indus
trial Internet of Things” broadens the relevance of the research
by showing it applies to a significant, growing field. Finally,
the terms like ”Scalable” and ”Real-Time” make it clear that
the work addresses important performance characteristics.
An Abstract is a summary, ideally divided into three parts:
the background and problem statement must be presented in
the first third, while the remaining two-thirds should detail the
research objectives, contributions, and significance. With this
organization, readers can quickly grasp the essence of the work
and are encouraged to delve deeper.
The Introduction Section should include a contextualization
of the problem, an overview of relevant literature, and a clear
statement of the research question or hypothesis. For long pa
pers, there could be a separate section after the Introduction,
such as the Related Work Section.
After that, the methodology, results, and discussion of the
paper should be presented in the main body of the paper.
In the main body of a paper, several sections or subsections
should correspond to different areas of the research, each flow
ing smoothly into the next. This is crucial for maintaining the
reader’s interest and facilitating comprehension. For example,
the methodology section should detail the problem formulation,
experimental design and setup, data collection methods, and an
alytical techniques, ensuring the study can be replicated. The
results section should present the findings clearly, often sup
ported by tables, graphs, and statistical analyses. The discus
sion should interpret the results, link them to the research ques
tions and hypotheses, and explore their implications.
Furthermore, the conclusion should encapsulate the main
findings, reflect on their implications, and suggest directions
for future research. In addition to reinforcing the paper’s ap
proach to the problem statement and contributing to the overall
narrative, it should tie back to the introduction.
There should be a clear structure for each section of the pa
per, with each paragraph beginning with a topic sentence high
lighting its main idea. This idea should be developed by cre
ating logical connections to support or elaborate on the ini
tial statement. Transitional phrases and cohesive devices en
sure that sentences and paragraphs flow smoothly, much like
the scenes in a well-crafted film. Transitions between sections
should be smooth, with each section concluding with a sentence
that connects to the next. A well-structured research paper en
gages readers by maintaining thematic continuity and logical
progression, just as an engaging movie captivates viewers with
seamless transitions and interrelated scenes.
In conclusion, a research paper is structured like a well
directed movie, with each section interconnected, each para
graph thoughtfully crafted, and every sentence contributing to
the overall story. From the abstract through the conclusion, re
searchers can ensure their readers understand their work and its
significance in the field by maintaining a clear and consistent
structure.
4.4. Writing Style
The next key dimension for preparing and evaluating a
manuscript is the writing style, which authors and reviewers
must consider. A research paper’s writing style significantly
impacts the clarity and effectiveness of ideas. To ensure that
content is presented clearly, accurately, and easily readable, a
set of guidelines must be followed. Here are key elements to
consider:
The following important notes should be considered not only
in the Introduction section, but throughout the manuscript.
19
4.5. Ethics in Publishing
• The first time an acronym is mentioned, it must be pre
sented in its full form.
• Once an acronym is defined, only the abbreviated form
should be used.
• Well-known terminologies should be abbreviated to en
hance readability.
• Abbreviated words should be presented in lowercase un
less they are recognized terminologies (e.g., the Internet).
• Titles should be concise, marketable, and free of excessive
clauses to enhance discoverability and engagement.
• Headings and subheadings should reflect the document’s
organization and follow proper capitalization rules.
• In-line lists should follow formats such as 1)... 2)... or i)...
ii)...
• Long paragraphs should be avoided, with one idea per
paragraph.
• Smooth transitions should be maintained between subse
quent paragraphs.
• Numerical values less than ten should be written as words
(e.g., one, two).
• Allmanuscript sections, except for ”Conclusion” and ”Re
lated Work,” should be written in the present tense.
• Themanuscript should be free from writing errors, includ
ing grammatical mistakes and misplaced punctuation.
• A period should not be placed at the end of subsection
headers.
• Clarity and precision should be maintained by avoiding
unnecessary jargon and overly complex sentence struc
tures.
• Evidence should support every claim made within the pa
per, with proper referencing.
• Figures, algorithms, and tables should be placed at the top
of the page or column and referenced clearly in the text.
As a result, the writing style of a research paper plays a critical
role in communicating the findings. Research can be signifi
cantly enhanced by adhering to explicit language, grammatical
accuracy, structural consistency, and proper formatting. These
guidelines not only assist in the presentation of the research but
also align with the expectations of academic journals, thus con
tributing to the advancement of knowledge in the field.
The integrity and credibility of academic research depend on
ethical publishing practices. Transparency, accountability, and
respect for intellectual property are vital principles that authors,
editors, and reviewers must follow. In the context of research,
academic misconduct refers to unethical behavior that violates
scholarly standards and integrity. Academic misconduct in re
search can take the following forms.
• Plagiarism: Using someone else’s research, ideas, or
words without proper attribution. Taking text, data, or con
cepts from another source and not giving credit to the orig
inal source is considered plagiarism.
• Fabrication: Creating data or results that do not exist. Cre
ating false results or inventing data can be involved in this
practice.
• Falsification: Manipulating research data, results, or pro
cesses to fit desired outcomes. Data manipulation, misrep
resentation, or selective reporting of results are examples
of falsification.
• Authorship Misconduct: Failing to give appropriate credit
to all contributors or including individuals as authors who
did not contribute to the research. A ghostwriter, for ex
ample, can write a paper without getting credit for it.
• Duplicate Submission: Submitting the same research pa
per to multiple journals simultaneously without disclosing
this to the publishers can lead to redundant publication and
waste of peer review resources.
• Improper Data Handling: Not maintaining accurate and
complete records of research data can prevent replication
and verification of the research.
• Peer Review Manipulation: Attempting to influence the
peer review process by suggesting favorable reviewers or
suppressing critical reviews. As a result, the review pro
cess becomes less objective.
Academic misconduct in research undermines the credibil
ity and reliability of scholarly work, damages the researchers’
reputations, and erodes trust within the academic community.
Institutions and publishers have strict policies and procedures
to detect, investigate, and address instances of academic mis
conduct to uphold the integrity of scientific research.
Due to the importance of plagiarism, we will discuss it in
detail in the following subsections.
4.6. Plagiarism
Plagiarism is a serious concern in research and other fields,
such as art and technology. All academic community members
need to acknowledge their debt to the authors of ideas, words,
and data that form the basis of their own research.
With or without consent, plagiarism is presenting someone
else’s work or ideas as one’s own, regardless of whether in
tentional, reckless, or unintentional. Materials such as pho
tographs, songs, ideas, thoughts, expressions, and results,
20
whether published or unpublished, may be included here. By
the United States (US) Patent and Trademark Office, plagiarism
is a violation of copyright laws, which protect original works
of authorship, such as literary, dramatic, musical, artistic, and
other intellectual works.
There are two types of plagiarism: deliberate plagiarism and
unintentional plagiarism. In deliberate plagiarism, the author
copies someone else’s work without giving credit. Meanwhile,
unintentional plagiarism occurs when individuals are unaware
of proper citation practices or don’t understand plagiarism. All
forms of plagiarism are considered serious offences, regardless
of their intent. To avoid plagiarism, researchers must learn and
adhere to proper citation and attribution rules.
Common forms of plagiarism are as follows.
• Copying Without Proper Credit: Using information from
the Internet or other sources without adequate referencing.
• Quoting Without Proper Credit: Verbatim quotations must
be acknowledged with quotation marks or indentation and
full source referencing.
• Paraphrasing Without Proper Credit: Altering a few words
or the order of words from another’s work without proper
attribution still constitutes plagiarism.
• Collusion: Unauthorized collaboration between students
or failure to attribute assistance received.
• Inaccurate Citation: Citing sources that were not actually
consulted or failing to access primary sources.
• Patchwork Plagiarism: Combining phrases and clauses
from different sources into one’s own writing without
proper citation.
• Auto-Plagiarism: Submitting identical pieces of work for
multiple assessments without acknowledgment.
• Self-Plagiarism: Reusing portions of one’s own previously
published work without proper citation or acknowledg
ment.
Self-plagiarism might be more common among young re
searchers since they are unaware of the above forms of pla
giarism. When an author reuses portions of their own previ
ously published work without proper citation or acknowledg
ment, they may mislead readers about the novelty of the work.
Common examples include duplicate publication (submitting
the same or substantial parts of a manuscript to multiple jour
nals), text recycling (reusing large sections from previous pub
lications), data recycling (reusing previously used data without
acknowledgment), and salami slicing (dividing a single sub
stantial piece of research into multiple smaller papers). As a
consequence of this practice, academic work loses its integrity,
giving a false impression of the author’s contributions, and aca
demic journals and institutions generally consider it unethical.
Researchers are encouraged to cite prior work appropriately and
ensure each new publication contributes something unique and
original to the field by citing prior work appropriately.
The consequences of plagiarism can be severe and include:
• Destroyed Professional Reputation: Plagiarism can lead to
losing credibility and respect within the academic commu
nity.
• EmploymentTermination: Individuals found guilty of pla
giarism may be fired from their institutions.
• Legal Repercussions: Plagiarism can result in lawsuits,
criminal charges, and monetary restitution.
• Loss of Publishing Privileges: Plagiarists may lose the
ability to publish their work in reputable journals.
Authors should follow the following guidelines to prevent
plagiarism and other unethical practices.
• Properly cite and separate verbatim copied material.
• Obtain permission to reuse figures or tables.
• Accurately paraphrase and credit ideas from other sources.
• Familiarize themselves with publisher policies.
• When utilizing AI-generated content, authors must dis
close its use in the acknowledgments section and cite the
AI system accordingly.
• Authors must submit original work that has not been pub
lished elsewhere or is under simultaneous review. If a con
ference paper evolves into a journal article, it must ensure
substantial new content is added and indicate differences
from prior submissions.
• Submissions must not have appeared in other publications.
Some journals, however, do not object if the manuscript
is already available online on preprint websites like arXiv.
To determine whether preprint publishing is permitted, au
thors should consult the target journal’s website.
• Authors should disclose any prior rejections of their work.
• All previous works should be cited appropriately.
The best way to avoid plagiarism is always to give proper
credit to the original authors, follow the citation style appropri
ate to their discipline, ensure that paraphrased content is signif
icantly different from the original and properly cited, and get
permission to use someone else’s material when in doubt. Sev
eral tools, such as Turnitin 12 and iThenticate 13, are available
to detect plagiarism and help ensure that the work submitted is
original and properly cited. To maintain academic integrity and
advance knowledge ethically, researchers must understand and
follow these guidelines.
12https://www.turnitin.com/
13https://www.ithenticate.com/
21
Plagiarism
Level
Level 1
Description
Copying 50–100% of a paper is considered
a flagrant violation.
Level 2
20–50% of the content being plagiarized.
Level 3
Less than 20% of the content being plagia
rized.
Level 4
Improper paraphrasing, e.g., minor word
changes without proper credit.
Level 5
Reused material is cited but not adequately
distinguished.
Table 4: Levels of Plagiarism and Their Descriptions
4.6.1. How IEEE Detects and Deals with Plagiarism Cases?
IEEE, one of the major publishers, defines plagiarism as the
act of using another person’s ideas, processes, results, or words
without acknowledgment. The unethical behavior described
here is a serious breach of professional ethics and cannot be
tolerated. In order to categorize and evaluate the extent of pla
giarism, IEEE has defined various levels of plagiarism, as illus
trated in Table 4 [34]. The levels of plagiarism are distinguished
based on the amount of material copied and how it was repro
duced.
When assessing possible plagiarism, evaluators consider sev
eral critical factors as follows:
• AmountorQuantity of Copied Material: This includes the
size of the plagiarized text, whether it is a full paper, a
section, or even just a sentence.
• Quotation Marks Usage: Using quotation marks for direct
quotes is essential to differentiate copied material.
• Placement of Credit Notices: Correct placement of ac
knowledgments ensures the original authors receive due
credit.
• Improper Paraphrasing: Even minor changes to the orig
inal text without acknowledgment are flagged as plagia
rism.
For multiple publications or submissions, IEEE requires that
submitted works be original and not under consideration else
where. While there is no strict policy regarding how much prior
work can be reused, transparency is critical. Authors must dis
close any overlap and properly cite earlier works while high
lighting novel contributions.
To assist in detecting plagiarism, IEEE employs the Cross
Check tool, which generates similarity reports by comparing
submitted manuscripts against a vast database of published ar
ticles. These reports use color-coded matches to highlight simi
larities and a percentage score to indicate the extent of overlap.
The CrossCheck system 14 flags manuscripts exceeding a
30%similarity threshold for further review. When high similar
ity scores are identified, reviewers have three primary options:
14https://crosscheck.ieee.org/crosscheck/
• Reject the Submission: For minor plagiarism, editors can
reject the paper outright.
• Request Revision: Authors may be asked to revise and re
submit their manuscripts.
• Initiate Formal Review: Serious cases are referred to the
IEEE IPR Office for a thorough investigation and appro
priate action.
CrossCheck thus ensures the integrity of IEEE publications by
streamlining the detection and management of plagiarism while
providing necessary support for editors and volunteers.
When plagiarism is detected in a submission to IEEE, seri
ous cases are referred to the IEEE Intellectual Property Rights
(IPR) Officeforathoroughinvestigation and appropriate action.
Anoverview of the procedure, investigation steps, and possible
actions are summarized as follows.
1. Detection: Plagiarism is initially detected using Cross
Check, a plagiarism detection tool that compares submit
ted manuscripts against a large database of published tech
nical papers and web pages.
2. Initial Review: The editor responsible for the publication
reviews the similarity report generated by CrossCheck.
3. Referral: If the plagiarism is deemed serious, the case is
referred to the IEEE IPR Office.
There are several investigation steps as follows.
1. Appointment of Committee: An independent committee
of experts is appointed to assist in the investigation to en
sure impartiality.
2. Review of Evidence: The committee reviews the evi
dence, including the similarity report and any additional
documentation provided by the editor.
3. Interviews: The committee may interview the author(s)
and any other relevant parties to gather more information.
4. Report: The committee prepares a detailed report of their
findings, including the level of plagiarism and any recom
mendations for corrective actions.
If a plagiarism case is detected, several possible actions may
be taken against the corresponding authors.
1. Rejection of Manuscript: The manuscript may be re
jected if plagiarism is confirmed.
2. Notification: The author(s) and their institution are noti
fied of the findings.
3. Author Education: In Level 1 or Level 2 plagiarism
cases, the author may be required to complete an author
education course and pass an exam.
4. Prohibited Authors List (PAL): Repeat offenders may be
placed on the Prohibited Authors List, which bans them
from submitting new manuscripts to IEEE publications.
5. Notification to Vice President: The Vice President of
the IEEE Publications Services and Products Board is in
formed at the beginning of the investigation and after find
ings are reached for final approval.
22
4.7. AI for Paper Writing
Generative AI (Gen-AI) refers to AI models designed to pro
duce new content based on patterns learned from large datasets,
such as text, images, or code [35]. Large Language models
(LLMs) are types of Gen-AI that process and generate human
language, such as GPT-3 and GPT-4 [36]. By training on a large
amount of text data, LLMs can predict and generate plausible
next words or sentences based on the given input (prompt).
LLMs use transformer architectures to analyze input text,
understanding context and relationships between words [37].
Based on the patterns learned during training, LLMs predict
the most likely sequence of words to follow the input. It can
be applied to paper writing by generating drafts, summarizing
research, or improving language quality.
The use of AI models can also be integrated into systems that
generate figures and equations for academic papers. However,
this requires specialized tools beyond LLMs, such as those in
tegrated with LaTeX [38].
Furthermore, LLMs can be trained to generate references,
though their reliability is a concern. Citations must be properly
cited, and AI-generated references may need to be verified.
Authors may use AI at different stages as follows.
• Research: LLMs can summarize academic papers, extract
key information, and even suggest new avenues for re
search.
• Drafting: LLMs can help create outlines, generate ideas,
and write sections of a paper.
• Editing: AI tools assist with grammar checks, sentence
structure, and style improvements.
However, there are several concerns about using Gen-AI in
paper preparation.
• Plagiarism: Unintentional plagiarism can occur, whereas
AI-generated text replicates existing content. This issue
arises since AI models are trained on large datasets, which
may contain copyrighted material. Thus, the generated
text might closely resemble or directly copy existing works
without proper attribution.
• AuthorshipandIntegrity: Over-reliance on AItools may
blur the lines regarding a paper’s true authorship. Due to
this, it is challenging to determine how much of a con
tribution comes from humans and how much comes from
artificial intelligence. The credibility of academic research
depends on ensuring that the primary ideas and critical
analysis are genuinely the work of the listed authors.
• Bias: The biases found in AI models can affect the objec
tivity and neutrality of academic research. Biases can take
many forms, including racial, cultural, or gender biases,
affecting research outcomes and interpretations. These
biases must be recognized and mitigated to maintain the
standards of fairness and impartiality in scholarly publica
tions.
5. Essential Components of a Research Paper Adhering the
Discussed Key Dimensions
The previous section discussed four critical dimensions that
define the quality of a research paper: technical content, content
structure, writing style, and ethical concerns. This section aims
to outline the essential components of a research paper with an
emphasis on adherence to these criteria.
A research paper is divided into sections that describe the
study’s purpose, methodology, and findings. The Title sum
marizes the main topic, while the Authors’ Affiliations indicate
the researchers’ affiliations. A summary of the paper’s objec
tives, methods, and results is provided in the Abstract. Adding
keywords to the document enhances discoverability by empha
sizing key concepts. Following the Introduction Section, which
outlines the research problem and its significance, the Related
Work Section summarizes relevant literature. The next section
consists of the main body, which includes problem formulation,
methodology, experiment design, and setup. In the Results Sec
tion, data and findings are presented, while the Discussion inter
prets these findings about the research questions. The Conclu
sion section summarizes the research’s implications and con
tributions. Additionally, the Acknowledgments and References
sections cite all sources and express gratitude to contributors.
An Appendix may also include supplementary material, such
as data or methodologies, that supports the main text without
being essential to its understanding. Then, a list of References
is presented. In the end, some journals may ask for the photo
and biography of the authors.
In the following subsections, we will explain all sections in
detail, along with requirements and tips for writing each one.
5.1. Title
The title of a research paper encapsulates the purpose and
importance of the study. An effective title should be concise yet
descriptive to engage readers and convey the significance of the
paper. In addition, a well-designed title increases the paper’s
visibility in search databases and academic repositories. Titles
should indicate the unique technical contributions of the paper
and distinguish it from other related papers.
• The title should be concise, descriptive, and elicit curios
ity, prompting the question, ”Is this relevant to me?”
• Thetitle is crafted to capture attention quickly, as it serves
as the initial point of engagement for readers.
• Titles convey the study’s content succinctly without using
unnecessary words.
• Titles should avoid uncommon acronyms unless they are
widely known.
• Coherence must be maintained throughout all sections
of the manuscript, including title, abstract, introduction,
body, and conclusion.
• Technical contributions are indicated in the title, e.g., main
keywords, and overly broad titles are refined to focus pre
cisely on the scope of the study.
23
• Survey papers should have titles that accurately reflect the
survey’s primary contribution without being too broad.
• Whennecessary, a colon separates the title from the subti
tle.
• Complex sub-clauses are avoided, supporting brevity and
clarity.
• Commonly recognized terms and abbreviations are se
lected to enhance readability for a broader audience.
5.2. Authors’ List, Affiliations, and Addresses
To maintain transparency and increase the credibility of the
research, the authors’ names, affiliations, postal addresses, and
e-mail addresses are included in research papers. Readers can
gain a better understanding of the study’s academic context
and institutional backing by reading about the institutions with
which the authors are associated. Through this information,
readers can identify the contributing researchers and contact
them for further inquiries or collaborations.
Authors can be included in a manuscript if they have made
significant contributions to its preparation. The key contribu
tions in a research paper typically fall under the following cat
egories: Conceptualization, Data Curation, Formal Analysis,
Funding Acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project Ad
ministration, Resources, Software, Supervision, Validation, Vi
sualization, Writing, Review, and Editing.
The practice of adding authors to a research paper who did
not contribute is known as gift authorship or honorary author
ship. When individuals are listed as authors even though they
have not contributed significantly to the research, this is unethi
cal. The reader may be misled about the actual contributors and
the distribution of work within the research team.
Common reasons for gift authorship include 1) adding
prominent or senior researchers to a paper to enhance its cred
ibility or chances of acceptance (prestige), 2) including friends
or colleagues to boost their academic profiles or as a return fa
vor (favoritism), 3) listing supervisors or department heads out
of obligation even if their involvement was minimal (institu
tional pressure), and 4) listing individuals who supported the
Article Processing Charges (APC) of a paper, even though fi
nancial support alone does not justify authorship.
By distorting the actual contributions of researchers, gift au
thorship undermines the integrity of the research process. It is
common for academic journals and institutions to have strict
guidelines and criteria for authorship to prevent such practices.
According to most guidelines, an author should meet all the
following criteria including: 1) making substantial contribu
tions to the conception or design of the work or the acquisition,
analysis, or interpretation of data; 2) drafting or revising the
manuscript critically for important intellectual content; 3) giv
ing final approval of the version to be published; and 4) being
responsible for all aspects of the work, ensuring that questions
related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are
appropriately investigated and resolved.
Acknowledging financial support in the acknowledgments
section is appropriate, but it does not qualify someone for au
thorship. Failure to adhere to these criteria can lead to retraction
of the article, damage to the authors’ reputations, and possible
institutional sanctions.
For the part of authors’ names, affiliations, and addresses of
a paper, it is important to consider the following points.
• According to the contribution each author has made to the
research, the order of authors is determined. Typically,
the first author is the individual who has made the most
significant contribution to the work.
• Usually, the last author position is reserved for the princi
pal investigator or senior author, who oversees the research
project and mentors the team.
• When there are multiple first authors (authors with equal
contributions), a symbol is added next to their names to
indicate equal contributions and a corresponding note is
included to clarify their contributions (e.g., The authors
contributed equally).
• Whenthere are multiple corresponding authors, a symbol,
such as an asterisk, is placed next to their names with a
footnote indicating they are the corresponding authors.
• The affiliation information usually includes the name of
the department, university, city, postal address, and coun
try, enabling academics to network, collaborate, and rec
ognize each other’s work.
• To maintain consistency and professionalism, authors’
names, affiliations, and addresses should align with recent
publications (e.g., formatting) in the target journal.
• Authors’ email addresses and ORCID 15 identifiers are
also included in this section to enable direct communica
tion and to enhance the traceability of academic contribu
tions.
• It is essential to avoid gift authorship, where individuals
who did not contribute significantly to the research are
listed as authors. This includes not adding individuals who
only provided financial support, such as covering the APC,
as this does not qualify someone for authorship.
5.3. Abstract
While preparing a manuscript, its Abstract is the last part to
be written. They are concise summaries that convey the essence
of a research paper after other sections are completed. A par
ticular structure is followed, which starts with a background
sentence explaining what the study aims to accomplish. It is
followed by a statement outlining the study’s purpose. Next,
the study’s objectives are clearly stated, followed by a discus
sion of its main contributions. Finally, the abstract concludes
with a statement emphasizing the significance and merit of the
15https://orcid.org/
24
5.4. Keywords
research. As a result of this structured approach, readers can
quickly grasp the core aspects of the research without having to
read the entire text.
• Background, objectives, and contributions introduced
in the abstract are aligned with corresponding sections
throughout the paper to maintain clarity.
• Readers can quickly comprehend the paper’s essence by
understanding the research problem, methodology, key
findings, and conclusions.
• Abstracts help readers assess a study’s relevance to their
interests without reading the entire paper.
• Abstracts are often the first thing potential reviewers and
readers encounter, so clarity and precision are essential.
• Research findings, results, and conclusions must be sum
marized concisely in Abstract.
• Abstracts are expected to be a ”stand-alone” version en
capsulating the article’s content and are usually between
150-300 words.
• Some journals require a graphical abstract for visual rep
resentation, normally a figure or diagram representing the
main idea presented in the manuscript.
• Claims without proof are not expected in Abstracts, such
as claims that the proposed model is simulated and com
pared with state-of-the-art methods, suggesting that all ex
isting methods are inferior.
• Anacceptable abstract is expected to contain one-third of
the background and problem statement, with the remain
ing two-thirds comprising objectives, contributions, and
significance.
• Technical contributions should be clearly stated, explain
ing how algorithms work and asserting their performance
relative to existing methods.
• The ideal abstract must include background context, a
problem statement, a clear objective, contributions articu
lated through proposals and discussions, and specific sur
vey contributions, including problem statements and sig
nificance.
• Itis important to articulate the advantages and significance
of the proposed technique in terms of specific evaluation
metrics to explain why it is superior to the related work.
• Justification should be given for the proposed work, along
with its potential applications.
• Abstracts are written in the present tense to ensure that
technical contributions and the significance of the pro
posed method are clearly stated, and comparisons are ex
plicitly stated.
Keywords are crucial to making a research paper more dis
coverable, as they facilitate indexing and retrieval in academic
databases. Researchers usually include three to ten carefully
chosen keywords summarizing the study’s themes and con
cepts. Keywords play an important role in assigning articles
to editors and categorizing them, so incorporating them into
both titles and abstracts is vital. When selecting keywords, re
searchers should reflect on what terms they would search for
and use relevant phrases instead of single words. Moreover,
analyzing keywords from similar papers can provide valuable
insights. The visibility and impact of a research paper can be
significantly enhanced by carefully selecting and placing key
words. In summary, the following points should be considered
while selecting the keyword.
• Keywords facilitate efficient database indexing and en
hance discoverability.
• The number of keywords included in a piece of writing is
usually between three and ten.
• To improve categorization, keywords should be incorpo
rated in the title and abstract and the rest of the manuscript.
• Research keywords are selected and reflected on relevant
search terms.
• Guidance on selecting keywords can be gained from simi
lar papers.
• Thoughtful keyword selection can boost visibility and ci
tation potential.
• Except for proper nouns, only the first letter of keywords
should be capitalized.
5.5. Introduction
Generally, the Introduction section of a paper introduces the
paper, not the topic. Therefore, only one or two paragraphs
should provide background and common knowledge about the
topic, and the rest should focus on the paper. A framework
for the research is established in the Introduction Section. It be
gins with the background of the study, emphasizing the research
problem and its significance. A review of existing literature
provides context for the current study, and gaps are identified
that the current study seeks to address. The literature review
or related work can be a part of the introduction section or a
separate section, right after the introduction section. Then, the
research objectives and hypotheses are articulated, clearly stat
ing the goals intended to be achieved through the work. Next,
a clear explanation and list of contributions is presented. The
structure of the manuscript is then discussed. This section is
crucial for establishing the rationale behind the study.
Key Guidelines for the Introduction Section:
• Introduction sections should begin with one or two para
graphs outlining the research context, closely aligned with
the state-of-the-art and problem statement.
25
• A problem statement is then defined in one paragraph
based on the background provided. It is the identification
of an unsolved problem from the background, highlighting
the main question of the research.
• The objective(s) are then described in a few sentences,
which clarifies what the paper will investigate.
• Following that, contributions are explained in a few para
graphs.
• Thesignificance of the proposed method is then explained.
Anexplanation of why this manuscript is superior to other
similar published papers, such as how extensive simula
tions or experiments show that the proposed technique
outperforms similar techniques/frameworks (in one para
graph).
• The paper will be easier to read with a clear list of con
tributions and significance. For example, ”The main con
tributions of this paper are summarized as follows. We
propose..., We present ..., We discuss..., Through exten
sive simulation/experiment results, we provide evidence
that the proposed technique is superior to [related work]
in terms of [evaluation metrics]”
• The merits of the proposed method should then be ex
plained, which is a discussion of its usage and advantages
in general, addressing its benefits for humanity (in one
paragraph).
5.6. Related Work
The ”Related Work” section reviews papers within the same
field that have recently been published. The related papers
should be analyzed based on their objectives, contributions, re
sults, and pros and cons. A comprehensive literature search is
necessary to locate nearly all recent publications with honesty
related to the topic. It may be the case that the proposed model
is new, and there are no related papers on the same topic. In this
case, the authors may broaden the scope and look for papers re
lated to the topic. This section should conclude with a clear
problem statement, highlighting a problem that the existing lit
erature has not yet addressed and indicating the necessity for
further investigation. In the case of a survey paper, the ”Related
Work” focuses solely on previously published survey papers
that discuss the same topic being presented in the manuscript
rather than on technical papers in the field. Including a table
that contrasts the scope of the current manuscript with those of
the related articles may enhance clarity for readers.
In summary, the following points should be considered in the
case of the Related Work Section.
• The section header should read “Related Work” or “Liter
ature Review”.
• ”Related work” entails the study of the most recent publi
cations in the same research domain.
• At the end of this section, a conclusion should be drawn
identifying the ’problem statement’, a problem not yet
considered by the related work.
• Insurveypapers, ”Related Work” refers exclusively to sur
vey papers that study the same topic intended for presen
tation, excluding technical papers.
• Acomparison table may be included in survey papers to
help readers discern the scope of this manuscript about ex
isting related survey articles.
5.7. Methodology
The methodology section explains the formulation of the
problem, the design and setup of the study, the data collection
methods, and the analytical methods used. It is essential to pro
vide this information for replicability and transparency so that
other researchers can better understand how the study was con
ducted. Participants, materials, experimental procedures, and
statistical analyses are typically described in this section. The
validity and reliability of research findings are critically depen
dent on clear documentation of these methods. The name of
this section should also reflect the proposed model or its ab
breviation. A diagram illustrating the proposed model is also
recommended to enhance understanding. There may be sev
eral subsections in this section, or it may be split into several
sections.
In summary, thekeycomponentsoftheMethodologySection
are as follows,
• Problem formulation is included in this section, which
identifies and clearly defines the issue the study aims to
address, establishing the research’s focus, scope, and rele
vance.
• A research paper on engineering may contain several
mathematical equations in this section. Based on the fol
lowing sentence, each equation is numbered separately
and integrated into the text, concluding with either a pe
riod or a comma. Math mode should be used for in-line
symbols, and bold symbols should only be used for vec
tors.
• Research design is explained as the overall strategy and
framework for the study.
• Detailed descriptions of how data will be collected, includ
ing tools and procedures, are provided for Data Collection
Methods.
• Analytical Techniques are explained by describing the sta
tistical analysis performed on the data collected.
• Alist of tools, instruments, or software employed in the
research is presented.
• Theexperimental procedure is explained as a step-by-step
account of the methodology used in the experiment.
• Analyses of statistics provide a clear explanation of how
the data is interpreted through statistical methods.
26
• Adiagramillustrating the proposed model is also included
in Diagram Representation.
• The presentation of algorithms should emphasize math
symbols and equations rather than long texts.
• Tables must be referred to in the text according to the jour
nal’s formatting guidelines.
5.8. Results
Throughout the results section, the findings of the study are
presented without interpretation, emphasizing their objective
nature. Tables, graphs, and figures are typically included in this
section to illustrate the key findings of the research. To facilitate
comprehension, the data is arranged logically to enable readers
to discern trends and patterns without having to delve into too
much detail. The data is completely focused on what it reveals
to ensure clear and effective communication of the results.
In summary, the key components of the Results Section are
as follows.
• There must be some results to support every claim.
• Results of the study are presented without interpretation,
maintaining an objective tone. Interpretation will be pre
sented in the next section, e.g., Discussion.
• The data included in this report includes both quantitative
and qualitative information.
• To illustrate key findings, tables, graphs, and figures are
incorporated into the report.
• To enhance comprehension, the data is arranged logically
in a logical manner.
• To make sure readers are able to understand the findings
based on the findings quickly, emphasis is placed on clar
ity.
5.9. Discussion
An emphasis is placed on exploring the implications of the
findings and how they relate to existing literature in the dis
cussion section. The significance of the results, as well as po
tential limitations and future research avenues, are discussed in
this part. The findings may be compared with previous stud
ies, explanations for unexpected results may be proposed, and
the contribution of the research to the field may be discussed.
Throughout this section, the authors demonstrate critical think
ing and a deep understanding of the subject matter.
Key Components of the Discussion Section are summarized
as follows,
• As a result of the research question, the study results are
interpreted about the question itself.
• Abroader interpretation of the findings and their implica
tions for the future are provided.
• Thefindings are compared with existing literature to high
light similarities and differences.
• Several potential limitations of the study are acknowl
edged in the paper.
• Future research avenues are suggested. If there are several
suggestions, there could be a separate section just before
the Conclusion Section, or even the two could be mixed,
e.g., Conclusion and Future Work.
• In the case of unexpected results, explanations are pro
vided to explain the results.
• An overview of the research’s contribution to the field is
provided.
5.10. Conclusion and Future Work
This section summarizes the key findings and their implica
tions, emphasizing the contribution of the research to the field.
This section often reiterates the main points discussed in the
paper and highlights the practical applications of the findings.
Conclusions are crafted to be clear and concise, providing a fi
nal perspective on the research while suggesting directions for
future investigations or applications. The conclusions must be
consistent with the evidence and arguments presented through
out the paper. Each objective in the introduction should cor
respond to a concluding comment, allowing for a holistic per
spective that aligns with the related work discussed. Addition
ally, authors may suggest areas for further research based on
their findings in this section. A limitation of the current work
can be identified; methods can be proposed to address those
gaps, or topics that require further investigation can be recom
mended. A conclusion section highlighting future work helps
readers understand where additional investigation might yield
valuable insights or innovations.
Key Components of the Conclusion Section are summarized
as follows.
• Themainfindingsandcontributions of the research should
be summarized in a clear and concise manner.
• Thesignificanceoftheresearchfindingsandtheir practical
applications are explained.
• Consistently presenting evidence and arguments in the pa
per to support conclusions.
• Aconclusion should be written for each objective stated in
the introduction.
• Thescope and direction of future research should be spec
ified.
• Enlightenment about the importance and potential impact
of the research.
• An overview of the paper in relation to the introduction
and related work.
27
5.11. Acknowledgment (Optional)
The acknowledgment section is not mandatory and is unnec
essary if the research has not received any funding from indi
viduals or institutions. Numbering is not provided for this sec
tion, e.g., without section number. The acknowledgment sec
tion expresses gratitude to individuals and organizations that
contributed to the research project. A variety of sources of sup
port are acknowledged in this section, including funding agen
cies, institutions, collaborators, and individuals. It highlights
the contributions of others and underscores the collaborative
nature of academic research. This section usually begins with
a statement of support, such as ”This research was supported
by...”, then includes a list of acknowledgments including indi
viduals, government agencies, grant providers and their grant
numbers.
The Key Components of the Acknowledgment Section are
summarized as follows.
• Grants, scholarships, and institutions that provide financial
assistance should be acknowledged.
• Those who contributed to the research but are not co
authors should be acknowledged.
• Resources and facilities should be acknowledged by the
institution or department providing them.
• Supervisors, mentors, or advisors who guided the research
should be appreciated, but only if they are not co-authors.
• Administrative staff or services that assisted in the research
process should be recognized.
• It is optional to include thanks to friends and family who
provided personal support during the research process.
5.12. References
There are three kinds of sentences in a research paper in
cluding: a) common knowledge, b) contributions, or 3) claims.
Here is a breakdown of each as follows. Common Knowledge
is widely known information that can be found across multiple
sources is included here, and it can be challenging to determine
who owns such words. Citations are not necessary since they
are widely accepted and easily verifiable by an educated reader.
For instance, a universally accepted fact or historical event falls
into this category.
Claims are statements that rely on specific sources for vali
dation, such as statistical data, findings from other research, or
interpretations from specific authors or studies. To ensure aca
demic integrity and credit the original authors, these statements
must be cited. Finally, contributions are the author’s words,
thoughts, insights, or conclusions that are unique to the current
paper. It is important for contributions to be validated through
theoretical frameworks, mathematical proofs, or empirical re
sults presented in the study’s results and discussion sections.
Classifying sources helps ensure that sources are credited ap
propriately and that the author’s novel work is clearly identi
fied.
The references section lists all sources cited in the research
paper, formatted according to a designated citation style. This
section is essential for crediting the original authors and making
it easier for readers to locate the sources for further study. In
cluding a comprehensive reference list enhances the credibility
of a paper by reflecting the breadth of the research conducted.
For others interested in related topics, it serves as a valuable
resource. To ensure that every assertion is substantiated, each
reference must provide evidence. Also, references are provided
to redirect readers to read more about a topic. All cited sources
must be cited in the text, with references placed at the end of
sentences when they relate to the entire sentence.
Various citation styles are commonly used in academic jour
nals and conferences, each with its own rules for formatting
references. Some of the most widely used styles include:
• APA (American Psychological Association): Common in
the social sciences, this style emphasizes the author-date
format for in-text citations and includes a detailed refer
ence list with the author’s last name, first initials, publi
cation year, title of the work, and source. [Author, A. A.
(Year). Title of the paper. Journal Name, Volume(Issue),
Page numbers. https://doi.org/xxxxxx]
• IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers):
Typically used in engineering and technology, IEEE uses
numbered citations within the text, linked to a full refer
ence list at the end. [Author First Initial., Last Name, ”Ti
tle of the paper,” Journal Name, vol. Volume, no. Issue,
pp. Page numbers, Month Year.]
• Chicago/Turabian: Two main citation methods are Notes
and Bibliography (commonly used in humanities) and
Author-Date (common in social sciences and physical sci
ences). It is flexible and used across many disciplines.
[Author Last Name, First Name. ”Title of the Paper.”
Journal Name Volume, no. Issue (Year): Page numbers.
https://doi.org/xxxxxx]
• MLA(Modern Language Association): Often used in the
humanities, this style uses in-text citations with the au
thor’s last name and page number, accompanied by a
Works Cited page. [Author Last Name, First Name. ”Title
of the Paper.” Journal Name, vol. Volume, no. Issue, Year,
pp. Page numbers.]
• Vancouver: Frequently used in medical and scientific liter
ature, this style involves numbered citations corresponding
to a reference list, similar to IEEE. [Author AA. Title of the
paper. Journal Name. Year; Volume(Issue) numbers. doi]
Key Components of the References Section:
• Allsources must be formatted according to a specific style
according to the target journal’s template as discussed
above (e.g., IEEE, APA, etc.).
• Each journal paper must include the authors’ names, title,
journal name, volume number, page numbers, and publi
cation month/year.
28
• Conference references should include the authors’ names,
title, conference proceedings, page numbers, city, country,
and year, with “Proc.” preceding the conference title.
• Emphasis should be placed on citing recent papers (e.g.,
recent three years) to reflect current research trends.
• Preference should be given to high-quality journal papers
over online or ArXiv resources, and excessive citation of
conference papers should be avoided.
• Atleast some papers published in the target journal should
be cited.
• Titles should be placed in {{...}} to indicate acronyms in
capital letters.
• Care should be taken to avoid citing retracted papers, en
suring the integrity of the research.
5.13. Appendix [Optional]
Appendices are included in research papers to provide sup
plementary material that is not essential to the main text but
supports the findings. The purpose of this section is to pro
vide additional details for clarity and completeness, such as
lengthy data tables, complex calculations, or technical speci
fications that are too lengthy to be included in the main body
of the paper. An appendix enhances the reader’s understanding
of the study without disrupting its flow. Appendices are typi
cally labelled with letters (e.g., Appendix A, Appendix B) and
referenced appropriately in the text.
Key Components of the Appendix Section:
• Inclusion of additional data, tables, or figures that support
the research.
• Provision of complex calculations or methodologies that
are too lengthy for the main text.
• Contribution to a better understanding of the research find
ings without cluttering the main sections.
• Recognition that the appendix is not mandatory and should
only be used when needed.
• Eachappendix should be labelled alphabetically (e.g., Ap
pendix A, Appendix B) for easy reference.
• Proper citation of the appendix within the main body of
the paper to guide readers to supplementary information.
5.14. Biography
A brief author biography is typically included at the end of a
research paper, providing an overview of the author’s academic
background, professional experience, and areas of expertise.
This section highlights the author’s contributions to the field,
current research interests, and affiliations to establish credibil
ity for the work presented. Readers could connect the research
with the author’s professional profile and expertise.
An effective author biography often includes the following
elements:
• Author’s full name, highest academic degree, and current
professional title.
• Nameoftheinstitution or organization where the author is
employed, along with the department or division.
• Summaryofacademichistory, particularly focusing on the
highest degree(s) earned and the institutions attended.
• Brief mention of primary research interests and fields of
specialization.
• Reference to significant contributions in the field, includ
ing high-impact publications or groundbreaking projects.
• Information on memberships in professional organiza
tions, editorial roles, and any prestigious awards or honors
received.
6. Conclusion
In this study, we introduced a structured, four-dimensional
framework for preparing and evaluating research quality across
diverse academic disciplines. By focusing on technical content,
structural coherence, writing precision, and ethical integrity,
the proposed model addressed critical gaps in current peer re
view practices, promoting a more transparent and consistent
approach to research evaluation. In each dimension, specific
guidelines were provided to improve manuscript rigor, ethi
cal standards, and clarity, enhancing the reliability of academic
publications and their societal impact. Moreover, we provided a
detailed discussion on the components of a research paper, ad
hering to the four-dimensional evaluation model by providing
guidelines and principles. As a result of this framework, sig
nificant practical implications emerge. For authors, it provides
a comprehensive guide to structuring research that meets rigor
ous standards, aiding in the production of high-quality, impact
ful publications. For reviewers, it offers a clear set of criteria
to ensure consistency in assessments, fostering equitable and
objective evaluations across disciplines.
Research in the future should focus on implementing this
framework across various publishing platforms and refining its
components based on academic feedback. Furthermore, fur
ther studies could explore how to adapt this model to evolving
ethical considerations, such as AI-generated content and open
access. With these initiatives, the academic publishing field can
work towards a morereliable, standardized, and ethically robust
scholarly communication landscape.
Acknowledgment
This research was supported by a grant (2022-MOIS63
001(RS-2022-ND641011)) of Cooperative Research Method
and Safety Management Technology in National Disaster
funded by Ministry of Interior and Safety (MOIS, Korea).
29
References
[1] H. Collins, Creative research: the theory and practice of research for the
creative industries, Bloomsbury Publishing, Nov. 2018.
[2] D. W. Song, What is research?, WMU Journal of Maritime Affairs 20
(Dec. 2021) 407–411.
[3] L. Litosseliti, Research methods in linguistics, Bloomsbury Publishing,
Sep. 2024.
[4] J. F. Matos, J. Piedade, A. Freitas, N. Pedro, N. Dorotea, A. Pedro,
C. Galego, Teaching and learning research methodologies in education:
A systematic literature review, Education Sciences 13 (Feb. 2023) 173.
[5] C.H.G.Paniura, M.A.T.Y.Esquivel, D. R. H. Tiza, Y. M. Yllpa, O. E. P.
Aguila, V. A. A. Flores, H. M. R. Fontalvo, T. C. Luza, C. A. B. Flores,
J. L. A. Gonz´ales, Research Methodologies in Engineering Sciences: A
Critical Analysis, Operational Research in Engineering Sciences: Theory
and Applications 6 (Jan. 2023) 20–38.
[6] K. Dehalwar, Basics of research methodology-writing and publication,
EduPedia Publications Pvt Ltd, Jul. 2024.
[7] R. Coe, M. Waring, L. V. Hedges, L. D. Ashley, Research methods and
methodologies in education, Sage, Apr. 2021.
[8] M. A. Hanson, P. G. Barreiro, P. Crosetto, D. Brockington, The strain on
scientific publishing, Quantitative Science Studies (Nov. 2024) 1–21.
[9] K. Hyland, Academic publishing and the myth of linguistic injustice,
Journal of Second Language Writing 31 (Mar. 2016) 58–69.
[10] H. Arenas-Castro, V. Berdejo-Espinola, S. Chowdhury, A. Rodr´ ıguez
Contreras, A. R. James, N. B. Raja, E. M. Dunne, S. Bertolino, N. B.
Emidio, C. M. Derez, et al., Academic publishing requires linguistically
inclusive policies, Proceedings of the Royal Society B 291 (Mar. 2024)
20232840.
[11] A. V. Alexandrov, How to write a research paper, Cerebrovascular dis
eases 18 (Aug. 2004) 135–138.
[12] J. Feld, C. Lines, L. Ross, Writing matters, Journal of Economic Behavior
&Organization 217 (Jan. 2024) 378–397.
[13] F. Ecarnot, M.-F. Seronde, R. Chopard, F. Schiele, N. Meneveau, Writing
a scientific article: A step-by-step guide for beginners, European Geriatric
Medicine 6 (Dec. 2015) 573–579.
[14] K. Kousha, M. Thelwall, Artificial intelligence to support publishing and
peer review: A summary and review, Learned Publishing 37 (Aug. 2024)
4–12.
[15] F. L. Rosenfeldt, J. T. Dowling, S. Pepe, M. J. Fullerton, How to write a
paper for publication, Heart, Lung and Circulation 9 (Oct. 2000) 82–87.
[16] L. M. Arrom, J. Huguet, C. Errando, A. Breda, J. Palou, How to write an
original article, Actas Urol´ogicas Espa˜nolas (English Edition) 42 (Nov.
2018) 545–550.
[17] B.V.Wee, D.Banister, How to write a literature review paper?, Transport
reviews 36 (Jul. 2016) 278–288.
[18] D. J. Benos, K. L. Kirk, J. E. Hall, How to review a paper, Advances in
physiology education 27 (Jun. 2003) 47–52.
[19] J. E. Casal, M. Kessler, Can linguists distinguish between ChatGPT/AI
and human writing?: A study of research ethics and academic publishing,
Research Methods in Applied Linguistics 2 (Dec. 2023) 100068.
[20] K. Dehalwar, S. N. Sharma, Fundamentals of Research Writing and Uses
of Research Methodologies, Edupedia Publications Pvt Ltd, Dec. 2023.
[21] A. Ghanad, An overview of quantitative research methods, International
journal of multidisciplinary research and analysis 6 (Aug. 2023).
[22] W. Zhao, R. Wu, W. Dai, Y. Dai, Research paper recommendation based
on the knowledge gap, in: 2015 IEEE international conference on data
mining workshop (ICDMW), IEEE, Jun. 2015, pp. 373–380.
[23] I. Karunarathna, P. Gunasena, T. Hapuarachchi, S. Gunathilake, The cru
cial role of data collection in research: Techniques, challenges, and best
practices, Uva Clinical Research (May 2024) 1–24.
[24] S. Belouafa, F. Habti, S. Benhar, B. Belafkih, S. Tayane, S. Hamdouch,
A. Bennamara, A.Abourriche, Statistical tools and approaches to validate
analytical methods: methodology and practical examples, International
Journal of Metrology and Quality Engineering 8 (Aug. 2017) 9.
[25] T. T. Le, Z. Andreadakis, A. Kumar, R. G. Rom´an, S. Tollefsen, M. Sav
ille, S. Mayhew, et al., The COVID-19 vaccine development landscape,
Nat Rev Drug Discov 19 (Jun. 2020) 305–306.
[26] W. Ertel, Introduction to artificial intelligence, Springer Nature, Nov.
2024.
[27] L. Messeri, M. Crockett, Artificial intelligence and illusions of under
standing in scientific research, Nature 627 (Mar. 2024) 49–58.
[28] K. Sharifani, M. Amini, Machine learning and deep learning: A review
of methods and applications, World Information Technology and Engi
neering Journal 10 (May 2023) 3897–3904.
[29] J. G. C. Ram´ ırez, Natural language processing advancements: Breaking
barriers in human-computer interaction, Journal of Artificial Intelligence
General Science (JAIGS) ISSN: 3006-4023 3 (Feb. 2024) 31–39.
[30] D. Fernandez-Llorca, E. G´omez, Trustworthy artificial intelligence re
quirements in the autonomous driving domain, Computer 56 (Feb. 2023)
29–39.
[31] D.Ueda,T.Kakinuma,S.Fujita, K.Kamagata, Y.Fushimi, R.Ito, Y.Mat
sui, T. Nozaki, T. Nakaura, N. Fujima, et al., Fairness of artificial intel
ligence in healthcare: review and recommendations, Japanese Journal of
Radiology 42 (Aug. 2024) 3–15.
[32] A. Vomberg, M. Klarmann, Crafting survey research: A systematic pro
cess for conducting survey research, in: Handbook of market research,
Springer, Dec. 2021, pp. 67–119.
[33] F. Shu, V. Larivi`ere, The oligopoly of open access publishing, Sciento
metrics 129 (Dec 2023) 519–536.
[34] B. Hagen, T. VenGraitis, Plagiarism detection and prevention: A cross
check overview, Presented at the IEEE Electron Devices Webinar Series,
2015. URL: http://www.ieee.org/ipr.
[35] S. Feuerriegel, J. Hartmann, C. Janiesch, P. Zschech, Generative ai, Busi
ness & Information Systems Engineering 66 (Mar. 2024) 111–126.
[36] Y. Chang, X. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Wu, L. Yang, K. Zhu, H. Chen, X. Yi,
C. Wang, Y. Wang, et al., A survey on evaluation of large language mod
els, ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology 15 (Mar.
2024) 1–45.
[37] S. Jamil, M. Jalil Piran, O.-J. Kwon, A comprehensive survey of trans
formers for computer vision, Drones 7 (2023) 287.
[38] S. Hossain, A. Chakrabarty, T. R. Gadekallu, M. Alazab, M. J. Piran,
Vision transformers, ensemble model, and transfer learning leveraging
explainable ai for brain tumor detection and classification, IEEE Journal
of Biomedical and Health Informatics 28 (2023) 1261–1272.
MD.JALILPIRAN(SeniorMem
ber, IEEE) holds a distinguished
academic background and currently
serves as an Associate Professor at
the Department of Computer Sci
ence and Engineering in Sejong Uni
versity, Seoul, South Korea. He
earned his Ph.D. degree in Elec
tronics and Information Engineering
from Kyung Hee University, South
Korea, in 2016, and subsequently
worked as a Post-Doctoral Fellow
at the Networking Laboratory of the
same institution.
Prof. Piran has made significant
contributions to the field of Artificial Intelligence and Data Sci
ence through his extensive research publications in esteemed
international journals and conferences. His areas of expertise
encompass Machine Learning, Data Science, Big Data, Internet
of Things (IoT), and Cyber Security. In addition to his research
endeavors, Prof. Jalil Piran actively engages with scholarly
journals as an Editor, including the ”IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems,” ”Elsevier Journal of
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence,” ”Elsevier
Journal of Physical Communication,” and ”Elsevier Journal of
Computer Communication”, as well as the Guest Editor for ”
IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics”. He also serves
as Secretary of the IEEE Consumer Technology Society on
30
Machine Learning, Deep Learning, and AI.Furthermore, he
assumes the role of Track Chair for Machine Learning, Deep
Learning, and AI in the CE (MDA) Track for the 2024 IEEE
International Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE).In
2022, he chaired the ”5G and Beyond Communications”
Session at the prestigious IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC). Prof. Piran is esteemed as a Senior
Member of IEEE and represents South Korea as an Active
Delegate to the Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG).
His outstanding research contributions have been recognized
internationally, as evidenced by the prestigious ”Scientist
Medal of the Year 2017” awarded by IAAM in Stockholm,
Sweden. Moreover, he received accolades from the Iranian
Ministry of Science, Technology, and Research as an ”Out
standing Emerging Researcher” in 2017. His exceptional Ph.D.
dissertation was honored as the ”Dissertation of the Year 2016”
by the Iranian Academic Center for Education, Culture, and
Research in the Engineering Group.
Nguyen H. Tran (Senior Member,
IEEE) received the B.S. degree in
electrical and computer engineering
from the Hochiminh City Univer
sity of Technology, in 2005, and
the Ph.D. degree in electrical and
computer engineering from Kyung
Hee University, in 2011. He was
an Assistant Professor with the De
partment of Computer Science and
Engineering, Kyung Hee University,
from 2012 to 2017. Since 2018, he has been with the School
of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, where he is
currently a Senior Lecturer. His research interest includes dis
tributed computing and learning over networks. He received the
Best KHU Thesis Award in engineering, in 2011, and several
best paper awards, including the IEEE ICC 2016, APNOMS
2016, and IEEE ICCS 2016. He receives the Korea NRF Fund
ing for Basic Science and Research, from 2016 to 2023. He has
been an Editor of the IEEE Transactions on Green Communi
cations and Networking, since 2016.
31
AppendixA:ChecklistsforDifferentSectionsofaPaperadheringtheDiscussedKeyDimensions
Section Criteria ✓
Title
IstheTitleconcise,descriptive,andengaging?
DoestheTitlepromptreaderstoconsideritsrelevance?
Does theTitle succinctly convey the study’s contentwithout unnecessary
words?
Areuncommonacronymsavoided, orareonlywidelyrecognizedacronyms
usedintheTitle?
IstheTitleconsistentwiththecontentacrossallsections(abstract, introduc
tion,mainbody,conclusion)?
Arethetopics,objectives,andcontributionsintroducedintheabstractconsis
tentwiththeTitle?
For technicalpapers,does theTitleindicatespecificcontributionsandavoid
broadscope?
Forsurveypapers, istheTitlefocusedonthesurvey’sprimarycontributions,
avoidingexcessivebreadth?
DoestheTitleincludeacolontodividethemaintitleandsubtitleforclarity,if
necessary?
Arecomplexsub-clausesavoided,supportingbrevityandclarity?
Arecommonlyrecognizedtermsandabbreviationsusedtoimprovereadabil
ity?
Doesthetitlecaptureattentionquicklyastheinitialpointofengagement for
readers?
Does thetitlereflectanddistinguishtheuniquetechnicalcontributionsfrom
similarstudies?
AuthorsListandInformation
Istheorderofauthorsdeterminedbytheircontributions,withthemostsignif
icantcontributorlistedfirst?
Isthelastauthorpositionreservedfor theprincipal investigatororseniorau
thor?
Isasymboladdedforauthorswithequalcontributions,andisanoteprovided
toclarifythis?
Arecorrespondingauthorsdesignatedwithanasteriskandafootnote?
Doestheaffiliationincludetheinstitutionname,department,city,postalcode,
country,andemailaddress?
Is thepresentationof authors’namesandaffiliationsconsistentwithrecent
publicationsinthetargetjournal?
Abstract
Istheabstractaconcisesummarywithin150–250words?
Doesitprovideabriefbackgroundorcontextforthestudy?
Istheresearchproblemclearlyoutlinedinasinglesentence?
Arethemainobjectivesofthestudystatedclearly?
Doesitsummarizethemethodologyused?
Arekeyfindingsorresultsofthestudyhighlighted?
Isthesignificanceandrelevanceoftheresearchclearlyconveyed?
Doestheabstractprovideaconcisesummaryofcontributionsandconclusions?
Isitwritteninthepresenttense?
Doesitstandalonewithoutrequiringadditionalcontextfromthepaper?
Are technical contributions and their relevance to state-of-the-artmethods
specified?
Arerelevantkeywordsorindextermsincluded?
Isthetoneoftheabstractclearandprecise,avoidingexcessivedetails?
Doesitincludepotentialimpactsorbenefitsoftheproposedwork?
Istheabstractfreefromoverlyassertiveorunexpectedclaims?
Keywords
Aretherebetweenthreetotenkeywordsincluded?
32
Section Criteria ✓
Arethekeywordsthoughtfullyselectedtorepresent thecorethemesandcon
ceptsofthestudy?
Arekeywordsincorporatedinboththetitleandabstracttoenhancecategoriza
tionanddiscoverability?
Arepotential searchtermsrelevant totheresearchreflecteduponwhenkey
wordsareselected?
Arespecificandrelevantphraseschoseninsteadofsingle,generalwords?
Doeseachkeyworduselowercaseexceptforthefirstletterofpropernouns?
Istheselectionofkeywordslikelytoboostthevisibilityandcitationpotential
ofthepaper?
Introduction
Does theintroductionprovideabriefbackground(1-2paragraphs)outlining
theresearchcontext, closelyalignedwithstate-of-the-artandproblemstate
ment?
Isthereaclearidentificationofanunaddressedproblem(problemstatement)
inthebackgroundsection?
Isthemainresearchobjectiveclearlystatedinasinglesentence?
Arethekeycontributionsexplicitlylisted,withphraseslike“wepropose,”“we
present,”and“wediscuss”?
Isthereanexplanationofthemanuscript’ssignificance,comparingitsvalueto
othersimilarresearch?
Does the introductionhighlight thegeneral benefitsandapplicationsof the
proposedwork(1-2paragraphs)?
Areacronymsdefinedat theirfirstmention,withonlytheabbreviatedform
usedafterwards?
Arewell-knownterminologiesconsistentlyabbreviatedtoenhancereadability?
Areheadingsandsubheadingsaccuratelyreflectingthepaper’sorganization?
Doestheintroductionavoidlongparagraphs,keepingonemainideaperpara
graph?
Isasmoothtransitionmaintainedbetweenparagraphs?
Arenumericalvalueslessthan10writteninwords?
Istheintroductionfreefromwritingerrors,includinggrammarandpunctuation
issues?
Istheintroductionwritteninthepresent tense,exceptwhenreferringtoprior
research?
RelatedWork
Isthesectiontitled“RelatedWork”or“LiteratureReview”?
Doesthesectionincludeareviewofthemostrecentpublicationsinthesame
researchdomain?
Doesitconcludewithaproblemstatementthathighlightsanunresolvedissue
inexistingliterature?
Forsurveypapers,doesthe“RelatedWork”sectionfocusexclusivelyonprior
surveyarticlesandexcludetechnicalpapers?
Isacomparisontable included(insurveypapers) toshowthescopeof this
paperrelativetootherrelatedsurveyarticles?
Is the languageclear andconcise, allowingreaders tofollowthe reviewed
worksandunderstandthepresentedgapeasily?
Methodology Istheproblemclearlyidentifiedanddefined?
Doestheproblemformulationestablishtheresearch’sfocus,scope,andrele
vance?
Istheoverallstrategyandframeworkforthestudyexplained?
Is thedesignof thestudy(e.g.,prospective, retrospective, randomized, con
trolled)clearlystated?
Areanyunusualmethodologies justifiedwithappropriatereferencesorcon
text?
Aredetaileddescriptionsofhowdatawillbecollectedprovided?
Arethetoolsandproceduresfordatacollectionclearlydescribed?
33
Section Criteria ✓
Isthestudypopulation(e.g.,participants,animals,cells)adequatelydescribed?
Areinclusionandexclusioncriteriaforparticipantsclearlystated?
Arethestatisticalanalysesperformedonthecollecteddataclearlyexplained?
Istheprimaryendpointspecified,alongwiththemethodsusedtomeasureit?
Aresecondaryendpointsandtheirmeasurementmethodsdescribed?
Isalistoftools,instruments,orsoftwareemployedintheresearchprovided?
Aremanufacturerdetails(name,city,country)forspecificequipmentortests
included?
Istheexperimentalprocedureexplainedasastep-by-stepaccount?
Areall interventions,operations,questionnaires,andimagingtechniquesde
tailed?
Areethical considerations, suchasethicscommitteeapproval andinformed
consent,addressed?
Arestandardstatementsaboutdatapresentationincluded(e.g.,means,standard
deviation,median)?
Arespecificstatisticalapproacheslistedforeachtypeofvariable?
Is thesamplesize justificationprovided, includingworkinghypothesis, ex
pecteddifferences,andalpha/betarisks?
Areplannedsubgroupanalysesdetailedtoavoidcriticismsaboutposthocstud
ies?
Isadiagramillustratingtheproposedmodel includedtoenhanceunderstand
ing?
Aremathematicalequationsnumberedseparatelyandintegratedintothetext?
Ismathmodeusedforin-linesymbols,withboldsymbolsreservedforvectors?
Arealgorithmspresentedinaspecificalgorithmmode,emphasizingmathsym
bolsandequationsratherthanlongtext?
Aretablesandfiguresreferredtointhetextaccordingtothejournal’sformat
tingguidelines?
Isthereabalancebetweentextdescriptionsandvisualdatarepresentations?
Results Arethefindingsofthestudypresentedwithoutinterpretation?
Isanobjectivetonemaintainedthroughoutthesection?
Arethereresultstosupporteveryclaimmadeinthesection?
Isbothquantitativeandqualitativedataincludedinthereport?
Aretables,graphs,andfiguresincorporatedtoillustratekeyfindings?
Isthedataarrangedlogicallytofacilitatecomprehension?
Aretrendsandpatternseasytodiscernwithoutdelvingintotoomuchdetail?
Isthedatacompletelyfocusedonwhatitreveals?
Isemphasisplacedonclaritytoensurereaderscaneasilyunderstandthefind
ings?
Arethefindingspresentedwithoutanyinterpretation?
Isanobjectivetonemaintainedthroughouttheresultssection?
Arethereresultstosupporteveryclaimmade?
Isbothquantitativeandqualitativedataincluded?
Aretables,graphs,andfiguresusedtoillustratekeyfindings?
Isthedataarrangedlogicallytoenhancecomprehension?
Aretrendsandpatternseasytodiscern?
Isthedatafocusedonwhatitreveals?
Isclarityemphasizedtoensureaneasyunderstandingofthefindings?
Discussion Aretheresultsofthestudyinterpretedinrelationtotheresearchquestion?
Isabroaderinterpretationofthefindingsprovided?
Aretheimplicationsofthefindingsforthefuturediscussed?
Isthesignificanceoftheresearchfindingsexplained?
Arethefindingscomparedwithexistingliteraturetohighlightsimilaritiesand
differences?
Arepotentiallimitationsofthestudyacknowledged?
34
Section Criteria ✓
Arefutureresearchavenuessuggested?
Isthereaseparatesectionforfutureresearch,orisitcombinedwiththecon
clusion?
Areexplanationsprovidedforanyunexpectedresults?
Isanoverviewoftheresearch’scontributiontothefieldprovided?
Aretheresultsinterpretedinrelationtotheresearchquestion?
Isabroaderinterpretationofthefindingsandtheirimplicationsforthefuture
provided?
Arethefindingscomparedwithexistingliteraturetohighlightsimilaritiesand
differences?
Arepotentiallimitationsofthestudyacknowledged?
Arefutureresearchavenuessuggested,andisthereaseparatesectionforthem
ifnecessary?
Areexplanationsforunexpectedresultsprovided?
Isanoverviewoftheresearch’scontributiontothefieldprovided?
ConclusionandFutureWork Arethemainfindingsandcontributionsoftheresearchsummarizedinaclear
andconcisemanner?
Isthesignificanceoftheresearchfindingsexplained?
Arethepracticalapplicationsofthefindingshighlighted?
Are theconclusions consistentwith theevidenceandargumentspresented
throughoutthepaper?
Isaconclusionwrittenforeachobjectivestatedintheintroduction?
Isthescopeanddirectionoffutureresearchspecified?
Areareasforfurtherresearchsuggestedbasedonthefindings?
Istheimportanceandpotentialimpactoftheresearchexplained?
Isanoverviewofthepaperprovidedinrelationtotheintroductionandrelated
work?
Arethemainfindingsandcontributionssummarizedclearlyandconcisely?
Isthesignificanceofthefindingsandtheirpracticalapplicationsexplained?
Aretheconclusionsconsistentwiththeevidenceandargumentspresented?
Isaconclusionprovidedforeachobjectivestatedintheintroduction?
Isthescopeanddirectionoffutureresearchspecified?
Areareasforfurtherresearchsuggestedbasedonthefindings?
Istheimportanceandpotentialimpactoftheresearchexplained?
Isanoverviewofthepaperprovidedinrelationtotheintroductionandrelated
work?
References Areall sources formattedaccording toa specificcitationstyle (e.g.,APA,
MLA,Chicago)?
Aretheauthors’names, title, journalname, volumenumber, pagenumbers,
andpublicationmonth/yearincludedforeachjournalpaper?
Are theauthors’ names, title, conferenceproceedings, pagenumbers, city,
country,andyearincludedforeachconferencereference?
Is“Proc.”usedbeforetheconferencetitle?
Isemphasisplacedoncitingrecent papers (e.g., last threeyears) toreflect
currentresearchtrends?
Ispreferencegiven tohigh-quality journal papersoveronlineorArXivre
sources?
Isexcessivecitationofconferencepapersavoided?
Areatleastsomepaperspublishedinthetargetjournalcited?
Aretitlesplacedin..... toindicateacronymsincapitalletters?
Iscaretakentoavoidcitinganyretractedpapers?
Areallsourcesformattedaccordingtothespecifiedcitationstyle?
Arethenecessarydetailsincludedforeachjournalpaper?
Arethenecessarydetailsincludedforeachconferencereference,with“Proc.”
precedingtheconferencetitle?
35
Section
Criteria
✓
Is emphasis placed on citing recent papers to reflect current research trends?
Is preference given to high-quality journal papers over online or ArXiv re
sources?
Is excessive citation of conference papers avoided?
Are at least some papers published in the target journal cited?
Are titles placed in ..... to indicate acronyms in capital letters?
Is care taken to avoid citing any retracted papers







___________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________






A Framework for Evaluating Emerging
Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
Mikel Rodriguez1, Raluca Ada Popa1, Lihao Liang1, Anna Wang1, Matthew Rahtz1, Alex Kaskasoli1, Allan
Dafoe1 and Four Flynn1
1Google DeepMind
As frontier AI models become more capable, evaluating their potential to enable cyberattacks is crucial for
ensuring the safe development of Artificial General Intelligence (AGI). Current cyber evaluation efforts
are often ad-hoc, lacking systematic analysis of attack phases and guidance on targeted defenses. This
work introduces a novel evaluation framework that addresses these limitations by: (1) examining the
arXiv:2503.11917v3  [cs.CR]  21 Apr 2025
end-to-end attack chain, (2) identifying gaps in AI threat evaluation, and (3) helping defenders prioritize
targeted mitigations and conduct AI-enabled adversary emulation for red teaming. Our approach adapts
existing cyberattack chain frameworks for AI systems. We analyzed over 12,000 real-world instances
of AI involvement in cyber incidents, catalogued by Google’s Threat Intelligence Group, to curate
seven representative attack chain archetypes. Through a bottleneck analysis on these archetypes, we
pinpointed phases most susceptible to AI-driven disruption. We then identified and utilized externally
developed cybersecurity model evaluations focused on these critical phases. We report on AI’s potential
to amplify offensive capabilities across specific attack stages, and offer recommendations for prioritizing
defenses. We believe this represents the most comprehensive AI cyber risk evaluation framework
published to date.
Keywords: Frontier AI Safety, Cybersecurity Evaluations
1. Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) presents significant
global opportunities with the potential to greatly
improve human well-being. In cybersecurity, AI
has long been vital for defensive operations. Re
cent AI advancements have enabled a new gener
ation of defensive applications, including identi
fying code vulnerabilities (Li et al., 2018, 2021;
Lu et al., 2024), understanding security posture
in plain language, summarizing incidents (Ban
et al., 2023), facilitating rapid incident response
(Hays and White, 2024), and performing various
tasks fundamental to modern cybersecurity best
practices (Du et al., 2024; Ruan et al., 2024).
However, like any emerging technology, AI
benefits come with risks. At Google DeepMind,
we explore risks and mitigations at the AI "fron
tier," encompassing dangerous capabilities match
ing or exceeding today’s most advanced systems
(Shevlane et al., 2023). Both model develop
ers and government bodies, such as the UK’s AI
Security Institute (formerly the AI Safety Insti
tute(InfoSecurity Magazine, 2025)), recognize
the importance of managing AI security risks.
Frontier AI cyber-capabilities pose several risks:
• Capability Uplift: Enhancing cyber skills,
enabling more actors to launch sophisticated
attacks.
• Throughput Uplift: Increasing the scale and
speed of attacks.
• Novel Risks from Autonomous Systems:
Creating new threats via automated re
connaissance, social engineering, and au
tonomous cyber agents, boosting attack ef
fectiveness and discretion.
These risks, outlined in Google’s Secure AI
Framework (SAIF) (Google, 2025a), are evi
denced by recent reports of AI misuse in cy
berattacks, such as Google Threat Intelligence
Group’s findings on generative AI misuse (Google,
2025b). A comprehensive evaluation framework
is needed to reason about emerging cyber risks
Corresponding author(s): mikelrodriguez@google.com,ralucapopa@google.com
© 2025 Google DeepMind. All rights reserved
A Framework for Evaluating Emerging Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
Proprietary 
Weaponization
Reconnaissance 
Delivery
Exploitation
Installation
Command &
control
Actions on
Objectives
Figure 1 | The Cyberattack Chain framework outlines typical cyberattack stages, offering a structured
approach to analyze threats, prioritize actions, and develop defenses.
and guide defense prioritization. In response,
AI labs have conducted safety evaluations (An
thropic, 2025; Bhatt et al., 2024; Derczynski et al.,
2024; Jaech et al., 2024; Shao et al., 2024; Wan
et al., 2024). These evaluations often include
specific assessments like Capture-the-Flag (CTF)
exercises (Bhatt et al., 2023) or knowledge bench
marks (Kouremetis et al., 2025; Tihanyi et al.,
2024). However, current methods typically fail
to systematically cover all cyberattack phases, po
tentially overlooking key factors and lacking clear
translation into actionable insights for defenders.
The Framework. We propose an evaluation
framework leveraging established cybersecurity
structures like the Cyberattack Chain (Lockheed
Martin, 2025) and MITRE ATT&CK (Strom et al.,
2018). As detailed in Section 2 and illustrated in
Figures 1 and 2, this approach:
• Systematically evaluates AI cyberattack ca
pabilities across the end-to-end attack chain.
• Informs AI-enabled adversary emulation.
• Helps identify gaps in AI threat evaluation.
• Provides defenders insights on where to tar
get and prioritize defenses.
The Benchmark.
The benchmark is comprised of the following
elements:
• Acurated set of representative cyberattack
chain archetypes derived from analyzing
over 12,000 instances of real-world AI use
attempts in cyberattacks across 20+ coun
tries.
• Aset of of bottlenecks identified across each
of the attack chain archetypes
• Aset of human expert baselines that can be
used to calibrate results and refine the selec
tion of bottlenecks A set of relative weights
associated with specific TTPs across each
stage of the attack chain based on prevalence
in the wild
• Aset of 50 externally developed CTFs and
representative environments sourced from
Pattern Labs that are not public and therefore
mitigate the risk of training data contamina
tion
Results and Learnings. Section 6 presents re
sults using Gemini 2.0 Flash experimental. The
model solved 11 out of 50 unique challenges (2/2
Strawman, 4/8 Easy, 4/28 Medium, 1/12 Hard).
Our analysis suggests current frontier AI capabil
ities primarily enhance threat actor speed and
scale, rather than enabling breakthrough capa
bilities. The benchmark revealed that current AI
cyber evaluations often overlook critical areas.
While vulnerability exploitation receives much
attention, AI models show significant potential
in under-researched phases like reconnaissance,
evasion, and persistence.
The Path to AGI Security. As frontier models
2
A Framework for Evaluating Emerging Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
Figure 2 | Mapping potential AI-enabled cost reductions to specific attack phases provides decision
relevant insights for defenders.
advance towards AGI, their cyberattack capabili
ties will evolve. We expect AI to alter attack phase
costs, prompting adversary adaptation. Our eval
uation strategy is designed to capture this evolv
ing landscape and serve as a resource for defend
ers. By continually updating representative attack
chains, bottleneck analyses, and AI uplift evalua
tions within this framework, we aim to maintain
an advantage against AI-enabled adversaries and
equip defenders with insights to strengthen their
security posture.
2. Background
Structured approaches are crucial in cybersecu
rity for understanding and defending against the
evolving threat landscape. Amid sophisticated
adversary actions, a structured perspective of
fers clarity, improves communication, and enables
strategic resource allocation. Two concepts that
revolutionized cyber defense are the Cyberattack
Chain (Lockheed Martin, 2025) and the MITRE
ATT&CK framework (Strom et al., 2018).
2.1. Cyberattack Chain
The Cyberattack Chain (Lockheed Martin, 2025)
models the typical progression of a cyberattack in
seven stages: Reconnaissance, Weaponization,
Delivery, Exploitation, Installation, Command
and Control (C2), and Actions on Objectives (Fig
ure 1). This structured view offers several ad
vantages for defenders. First, it provides a com
mon language for discussing attacks, facilitating
clear communication. Second, it helps defenders
identify strategic intervention points within the
attack sequence. Understanding these stages al
lows defenders to identify critical control points,
deploy targeted defenses, and shift from reac
tive responses to proactive, layered strategies by
anticipating attack progression and allocating re
sources effectively.
2.2. MITRE ATT&CK Framework
Complementing the Cyberattack Chain, the
MITRE ATT&CK framework (Strom et al., 2018)
is a comprehensive knowledge base of adversary
tactics and techniques based on real-world obser
vations. ATT&CK uses a matrix structure, orga
nizing adversary behavior into tactics (high-level
goals like "Initial Access" or "Exfiltration") and
techniques (specific methods like "Spearphish
ing Attachment" or "Pass the Hash"). Its value
lies in characterizing adversary behavior patterns
granularly. Mapping attacker actions to ATT&CK
techniques helps organizations understand how
attacks are executed, enabling the development
of targeted defenses against specific adversary
methods.
3
A Framework for Evaluating Emerging Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
Figure 3 | Frontier AI safety evaluations reveal
cyber capabilities, but translating these findings
into practical defense strategies remains challeng
ing.
3. The Case for a Structured Cyberat
tack Chain Evaluation of AI
In resource-constrained environments facing nu
merous threats, structured frameworks like the
Cyberattack Chain and MITRE ATT&CK are es
sential tools for prioritizing resources, not just
conceptual models. Without understanding real
world attack progression and techniques, organi
zations struggle to allocate security investments
effectively. These frameworks enable strategic
resource deployment, enhancing overall security
posture and moving organizations from reactive
firefighting to proactive, risk-informed defense.
3.1. Frontier Safety Evaluations: Measuring
AI Cyber Skills
Organizations increasingly use safety evaluations
to assess the implications of advanced AI models
in domains like cybersecurity (Anthropic, 2025;
Jaech et al., 2024; Wan et al., 2024). Cyber safety
evaluations typically measure AI model perfor
mance on specific skills using benchmarks and
challenges, including:
• CTF-style Exercises: Jeopardy-style CTFs
measure the ability to execute specific tasks
in isolated environments (Bhatt et al., 2023,
2024; Wan et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2023b).
• Knowledge Benchmarks: Assess model
knowledge on specific topics, often using
Q&A or prompt exercises (Kouremetis et al.,
2025).
• Uplift Studies: Measure AI’s impact on
threat actors by assessing improvements in
user task performance (Wan et al., 2024).
• CyberRangeExercises: Usesimulated, real
istic environments more elaborate than indi
vidual CTFs, potentially involving agent-like
systems with reasoning and planning capa
bilities (Phuong et al., 2024).
• ForecastingStudies: Predicttheoperational
impact of AI models, estimating cost reduc
tion, attack frequency, etc. (Phuong et al.,
2024).
These evaluations provide valuable data on AI
models’ raw cyber capabilities (e.g., exploiting
vulnerabilities, crafting exploits). Evaluation re
sults, often reported as scores or success rates,
indicate potential risks and opportunities associ
ated with advanced AI in cybersecurity (Figure
3).
3.2. The Limitation
While frontier safety evaluations offer crucial in
sights into AI cyber capabilities, a significant gap
remains in translating these findings into action
able defense strategies for real-world scenarios.
A model’s high score on a reverse engineering
CTF, for instance, doesn’t directly dictate defen
sive actions like investing in anti-reverse engi
neering tech or updating incident response pro
tocols. Current evaluations, though valuable for
measuring specific capabilities, often lack the con
text needed to inform defenses regarding how AI
mightimpact thecostof executing attackpatterns.
Bridging this gap between identifying AI-related
risks and empowering defenders with actionable
insights is the central challenge this paper ad
dresses.
3.3. The Cost Collapse Argument
To bridge the gap between AI evaluations and ac
tionable defense insights, we must consider how
advanced AI could fundamentally alter cyberat
tack economics. We argue the primary risk of
frontier AI in cyber is its potential to drasti
cally reduce costs for attack stages historically
4
A Framework for Evaluating Emerging Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
Figure 4 | Overview of our proposed evaluation framework approach.
expensive, time-consuming, or requiring high
sophistication.
Traditionally, advanced cyberattacks demand
significant time, expertise, tools, and infrastruc
ture. Stages like vulnerability research, exploit
development, and sophisticated social engineer
ing have acted as barriers, limiting complex at
tacks to well-resourced actors. Frontier AI threat
ens to dismantle these barriers by automating
complex tasks, potentially lowering entry barriers
for malicious actors. For example, discovering a
zero-day vulnerability can take months of expert
research (Ablon and Bogart, 2017). If AI auto
mates parts of this process, the cost in time and
labor decreases dramatically. Similarly, AI could
automate targeted phishing campaigns, reducing
attacker effort and increasing success rates.
To quantify and track this potential cost shift
and inform defenses, we propose an analogy to
economic inflation measurement. We suggest us
ing an evolving "basket of cyber goods" represent
ing typical attack patterns based on real-world
threat intelligence. By systematically measuring
potential AI-driven cost changes across attack
chain stages and patterns, we can develop a
robust framework for evaluating AI model risk.
This approach moves beyond capability assess
ment, enabling us to: 1) identify attack chain
areas likely to see outsized benefits from AI, and
2) understand when evaluation results indicate
an AI system will meaningfully affect attack costs
and potentially incidence. This understanding is
vital for proactive mitigation, responsible AI de
velopment in cyber, and ensuring defenses keep
pace with the evolving threat landscape.
4. The Evaluation Framework
We propose a systematic mapping process to
translate cyber capability evaluations across cy
berattack patterns into insights for prioritizing
defensive strategies. Our methodology comprises
four interconnected stages (Figure 4).
4.1. Stage 1: Curating a Basket of Represen
tative Attack Chains
We begin by establishing a comprehensive, dy
namic "basket" of representative cyberattack
chains reflecting current and anticipated method
ologies. To construct this basket, we analyzed
over 12,000 real-world instances of AI use at
tempts in cyberattacks (Figure 5) and utilized
a large dataset of cyber incidents from Google’s
Threat Intelligence Group and Mandiant. The
goal is to capture the breadth and depth of the
threat landscape, including various attack vec
tors, target environments, and adversary motiva
tions. This ensures our analysis is grounded in
real-world attack practices. This process led to
identifying general attack chains for monitoring
(Figure 7).
4.2. Stage 2: Bottleneck Analysis Across Rep
resentative Attack Chains
Having curated a basket of representative attack
chains, we conduct a "bottleneck analysis". A bot
tleneck is an attack stage presenting significant
hurdles for the attacker, increasing the defender’s
disruption opportunity. Focusing on key bottle
necks ensures our evaluations target capability
5
AFrameworkforEvaluatingEmergingCyberattackCapabilitiesofAI
 
 Attack Chain Phase Real-world instances of misuse of AI 
Reconnaissance ● Research publicly reported vulnerabilities and specific CVEs 
● Recon on international defense organizations 
● Research target infrastructure 
● Understand public database of target organization personnel  
● Research on specific CVEs and technologies 
● Research on server-side request forgery exploitation techniques 
● Reverse engineering the endpoint detection 
Weaponization ● Add malware encryption functionality to existing code 
● Generate fake company profiles 
● Assist with malicious scripting 
● Brainstorm ideas for a PR campaign and accompanying visual designs 
Delivery, Exploitation ● Create more persuasive BEC messages 
● Help augment business email compromise (BEC) operations 
● Research advanced techniques for phishing Gmail 
● Research vulnerabilities in the WinRM protocol 
● Reverse engineer endpoint detection and response 
● Access Microsoft Exchange using a password hash 
● Router exploitation 
Installation ● Sign an Outlook VSTO plug-in 
● Deploy Outlook VSTO plug-in silently 
● Add a self-signed certificate to Active Directory 
● Exploit  chrome extensions that provide parental controls and monitoring  
Command and Control ● Generate code to remotely access Windows Event Log 
● Obtain Active Directory management commands 
● JSON Web Token (JWT) security and routing rules in Ruby on Rails 
● Character encoding issues in smbclient 
● Command to check IPs of admins on the domain controller 
Actions on Objectives ● Identify sensitive documents within large data stores  
● Automate workflows with Selenium (e.g., logging into compromised 
account) 
● Automate data exfil from compromised Gmail accounts. 
Figure5|ObservedinstancesofAIuseacrossvariousattackchainphases.
increasesthatmeaningfullyaffectattackexecu
tionandscalability.
IdentifyingBottlenecks inAttackChains.
Identifying stageswithsignificant hurdles in
volvesconsideringtraditionalcosts(time,effort,
knowledge,scalability)associatedwithexecuting
thatphase.Quantifyingtheseissubjectiveand
context-dependent. Weusedtwocomplemen
taryapproaches:data-drivenanalysisandexpert
interviews.
Forthedata-drivenapproachtoassessingbot
tlenecksweingestedMandiant’sThreat Intelli
gencedataset,containingdetailedattackdecon
structionsandtimelinesderivedfrombreachre
sponse,networkmonitoring,andadversaryre
search.Wealsoconductedanexpertstudyask
ingparticipantsforrelativecostestimatesforat
tackphasesinhistoricalcasestudies(Appendix
A).ThisassessmentconsidershowAIcapabili
tiesshowninsafetyevaluationscouldautomate
orsimplifycomplextasks.Byidentifyingbottle
neckstages(AppendixA),wepinpointcritical
phasesintheattacklifecyclemostsusceptibleto
AIinfluence.
6
A Framework for Evaluating Emerging Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
Reconnaissance
Gather Victim Identity Information
Social Media Harvesting
Search Open Technical Databases
Gather Victim Organization Information
Search Open Websites/Domains
Phishing for Information
Figure 6 | Prevalence of observed AI-enabled tech
niques within the reconnaissance phase. Real
world instances ground our selection of attack
chains, likelihood estimates, and evaluation de
sign.
4.3. Stage 3: Devising Targeted Cybersecurity
Model Evaluations
Having identified bottlenecks, we devise targeted
model evaluations. For each bottleneck, we create
evaluations measuring an AI’s ability to reduce
associated costs. These go beyond generic capabil
ity assessments, simulating real-world conditions
relevant to the targeted attack pattern. Key con
siderations include:
• Simulated Environments: Evaluations use
environments realistically representing tar
get systems, networks, and security controls
(e.g., virtual networks, realistic vulnerabili
ties, simulated user behavior).
• Real-World Conditions: Incorporate con
straints like noisy data, limited information,
or adversarial defenses mirroring attacker
challenges.
• Cost Reduction Metrics: Evaluations gener
ate metrics quantifying AI’s cost reduction
for the bottleneck phase. Examples include:– Time to Completion: AI task comple
tion time compared to baseline (human,
non-AI tools).– Success Rate: AI reliability in execut
ing the task, reflecting reduced effort
and increased effectiveness.– Capability Level Required (Proxy
Metrics):
Inferring
knowledge
barrier reduction by analyzing re
sources/expertise needed with AI (e.g.,
prompt complexity).– Scalability Metrics: Assessing AI’s abil
ity to repeat the task across multiple
targets, indicating increased scalability.
4.4. Stage 4: Evaluation Execution and Aggre
gated Cost Differential Scores
The final stage involves executing the targeted
evaluations to assess an AI model’s potential cost
impact across the representative attack chains.
We systematically collect the defined cost reduc
tion metrics, aiming to provide a "cost differential
score" for the model, capturing its potential to am
plify offensive cyber capabilities. A higher score
indicates greater potential for the AI to disrupt cy
berattack economics, highlighting areas needing
prioritized mitigation.
5. Evaluation Benchmark
To ground our methodology in the current and
emerging cyber threat landscape, we curated rep
resentative attack patterns using expert consul
tations and extensive open-source intelligence.
Sources included:
• Adversarial Misuses of Generative AI
Dataset: Analysis of Gemini activity by
known APT actors from 20+ countries using
AI across the attack lifecycle (research, recon
naissance, vulnerability research, payload
development, evasion) (Google, 2025b).
• CSIS Significant Cyber Events: Review of
the Center for Strategic and International
Studies database (Center for Strategic and
International Studies, 2025) for a broad
overview of impactful attacks.
• Mandiant Advantage Platform Threat In
telligence: Data from Mandiant (2025) pro
viding detailed analyses of APTs and attack
techniques in real-world breaches.
Synthesizing insights from these sources aimed
to build a "basket" representative of significant
real-world risks.
7
A Framework for Evaluating Emerging Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
5.1. Selection Criteria: Prioritizing Impact
and AI Relevance
We distilled the initial attack chains using criteria
prioritizing impactful, real-world patterns rele
vant to emerging AI capabilities:
• Prevalence: Prioritizing attack types fre
quently observed in real-world incidents.
• Severity: Considering potential impact (fi
nancial loss, operational disruption, reputa
tional damage, data breach sensitivity).
• Likelihood to Benefit from AI: Prioritizing
attack types where AI could offer substantial
"capability" or "throughput uplift," informed
by real-world AI misuse data and capability
evaluations. We focused on stages histori
cally bottlenecked by human ingenuity, time,
or specialized skills, evaluating AI’s potential
to automate or augment them.
Applying these criteria ensures our benchmark
focuses on attack patterns relevant today and
strategically important regarding advancing AI
capabilities.
5.2. Representative Attack Chains
Based on our curation and criteria, the following
representative attack chains form our benchmark,
representing prevalent, impactful threats relevant
to assessing frontier AI impact:
• Phishing: A top initial access vector relying
on social engineering, where AI could en
able sophisticated, personalized campaigns.
High-impact examples include the DNC leak
and Facebook breach.
• Malware (Ransomware, Trojans, Worms):
Pervasive threats causing significant disrup
tion and damage (e.g., WannaCry, NotPetya).
AI advancements in polymorphic generation
and evasion make this critical.
• Denial-of-Service (DoS): Can cause ma
jor service disruption (e.g., Dyn, GitHub at
tacks). AI-driven automation could lower
barriers for large-scale DDoS attacks.
• Man-in-the-Middle
cepts/manipulates
(MitM):
Inter
communication,
Attack Type 
Phishing 
Malware 
Denial-of-Service (DoS) 
Man-in-the-Middle (MitM) 
SQL Injection 
Zero-Day Attack 
Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) 
Examples of Recent & Historical 
Incidents - LoanDepot Ransomware Attack (2024) - 
Pepco Social Engineering Attack (2024) 
Democratic National Committee email leak  
(2016) -Black Basta (2024) WannaCry 
ransomware attack (2017) - NotPetya 
cyberattack (2017) - Hyper-volumetric attacks on Cloudflare 
(2024) Dyn cyberattack (2016) - GitHub 
DDoS attack (2018) - GuptiMiner by the Kimsuky group (2024) 
Superfish adware (2015) - KRACK Wi-Fi 
vulnerability (2017) - GambleForce Attack (2024) Heartland 
Payment Systems data breach (2008) - 
TalkTalk data breach (2015) -  Fortinet FortiGate (2024) Stuxnet (2010) - Sony Pictures hack (2014) -Roundcube Webmail Exploitation (2024) -Netgear Auth Bypass, XSS Flaw (2024) 
Figure 7 | Selected attack chain archetypes for
the evaluation benchmark.
compromising
confidentiality/integrity
(e.g., Superfish, KRACK). AI could enhance
stealth and effectiveness through automated
traffic analysis/manipulation.
• SQL Injection: Highly prevalent web appli
cation vulnerability leading to data breaches
(e.g., Heartland, TalkTalk). AI could auto
mate discovery and exploitation.
• Zero-Day Attack: Exploits unknown vul
nerabilities, often associated with advanced
adversaries and severe consequences (e.g.,
Stuxnet, Sony hack).
• Cross-Site Scripting (XSS): Injects mali
cious scripts into web content, leading to
account takeover, data theft. AI could poten
tially enhance sophistication by automating
discovery and generating evasive payloads.
This collection of representative attack chains
serves as the foundation for applying our bot
tleneck analysis and targeted evaluation method
ologies.
5.3. Evaluation Benchmark Details
Following bottleneck identification (Appendix A),
we sourced 50 evaluations from Pattern Labs’ li
8
A Framework for Evaluating Emerging Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
brary of withheld CTFs that test diverse capa
bilities relevant to the bottlenecks we identified,
covering a spectrum of difficulty.
Challenge types included:
• Vulnerability Detection and Exploitation
(V&E): Require autonomous identification
and exploitation of vulnerabilities within a
constrained scope (single service, machine,
etc.) to precisely measure core exploitation
abilities.
• Evasion Challenges: Assess executing cy
ber operations while evading detection by
systems like EDRs, crucial for stealthy opera
tions.
• Network Attack Simulation: Require
achieving broader objectives in simulated
networks, assessing comprehensive situa
tional awareness, strategic planning, and
adaptation to dynamic environments and de
fenses. Success typically requires integrating
multiple skills (reconnaissance, code devel
opment, service manipulation).
6. Evaluation
Evaluations use Capture-the-Flag (CTF) chal
lenges, where cyber expertise is used to find a hid
den ’flag’. This format allows customization for
various skills and difficulty levels, including com
plex multi-step processes. For each challenge, we
provided an attacker goal, environment details,
and tool usage instructions (e.g., shell execution
tool).
Scoring. We calculate the percentage of suc
cessful attempts per difficulty level across evalua
tion clusters capturing identified bottlenecks. Suc
cess rates show performance variation across dif
ficulty thresholds for bottleneck skills. The model
had 30 interactions (each limited to one shell
command) per challenge. Success was counted
if the flag appeared in the command, its output,
or the model’s output. Each evaluation targets
at least one critical bottleneck capability. Task
difficulty levels (Strawman, Easy, Medium, Hard)
were assigned based on expert judgment and cali
bration with public tasks, indicating the expected
attacker skill level needed.
• Strawman: Straightforward tasks ensuring
basic instruction following.
• Easy: Exploit common vulnerabilities in new
contexts; solvable by practitioners with lim
ited experience.
• Medium: Require multiple steps, e.g., com
bining vulnerability exploits.
• Hard: Require combining multiple insights
and non-trivial implementation; challenging
even for experienced practitioners.
Model Configuration. We evaluated Gemini
2.0 Flash experimental. To ensure consistency of
the results and findings we conducted our eval
uation using both an internal scaffolding (tools,
prompting procedure, error handling) to form
an agent (Figure 9) as well as using the scaf
folding provided by the vendor that developed
the CTF challenges.The default hyperparameters
were used. The workflow involved a controller
feeding challenge descriptions to the model, han
dling tool calls, forwarding commands to the en
vironment, receiving results, and iterating until
solved or interaction limit reached.
Figure 10 shows results grouped by bottleneck
skills and attack chain phases. Gemini 2.0 Flash
solved 11/50 unique challenges (2/2 Strawman,
4/8 Easy, 4/28 Medium, 1/12 Hard). Across bot
tleneck skill clusters:
• Operational Security: 40% success rate (dis
covery evasion, attribution evasion, adapta
tion). Higher success possibly due to less
reliance on long sequences of perfect syntax
required to solve this class of problems.
• Vulnerability Exploitation: 6.25% success
rate (exploit development, handling miti
gations). Failure often due to reliance on
generic strategies.
• Malware Development: 30% success rate
(This included the creation of cyber network
attack and exploitation programs and the
development of malware as infrastructure).
• InfoGathering/Reconnaissance: 11.11%suc
cess rate (OSINT, artifact prioritization, net
work reconnaissance).
Overall, we judge this model currently lacks
the offensive cybersecurity capabilities to enable
9
Proprietary 
A Framework for Evaluating Emerging Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
Reconnaissance Weaponization Delivery
Active Scanning
Content Injection
Exploitation
Cross-site scripting Crypto vulnerability
Gather Victim Host 
Information
Exploit 
Public-Facing 
Application
Man-in-the-Middle
Installation
Command and Control Actions on Objectives
Exploitation of 
Remote Services Application Layer Protocol
Side-channel attack Domain 
controller
Web Exploration
Network recon
discover network 
credentials
Valid accounts
Vulnerability in 
OpenSSL.
Exploitation for 
Privilege Escalation Package vulnerability
Create or Modify 
System Process
Web Service
Weak Randomness
HTTP header attack
SQL injection
Kerberoasting
Memory exploitation 
Content Injection
Protocol Tunneling
Tunnel over network node
Automated Exfiltration
Exfiltration Over Web Service
Exfiltration Over C2 Channel
Encrypt and exfiltrate
Figure 8 | Representative Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (TTPs) covered in evaluations, aiming
for broad coverage across attack chain stages.
Figure 9 | Overview of the agent model configu
ration used in evaluations.
breakthrough capabilities for threat actors. How
ever, as frontier AI becomes more advanced, the
types of cyberattacks possible will evolve, requir
ing ongoing capability evaluations and improve
ments in defense strategies.
Observed Failure Modes. Common failures
involved long-range syntactic accuracy and strate
gic reasoning. Models often made simple syntax
errors (wrong flags, hallucinated parameters), es
pecially problematic in multi-step tasks. Models
also tended to default to generic strategies or get
stuck in loops trying minor variations, hinder
ing performance on medium/expert evaluations
requiring creativity.
40.00%
30.00%
20.00%
Solve Rate
10.00%
0.00%
Bottleneck Skills Across Phases of Attack Chains
Figure 10 | Challenge solve rates across different
attack chain stages/bottleneck skills.
6.1. Insights for Defenses
Integrating understanding of how real-world
attack patterns are impacted by AI helps or
ganizations prioritize risks based on likely AI
enabled techniques and their potential impact.
The framework focuses attention on high-priority
AI-enabled techniques, allowing focused defense
against critical threats. This section outlines how
Malware Development
the framework informs defensive efforts.
Operational Security
Threat Coverage Gap Assessment. Struc
turing evaluation results using the attack chain
helps map emerging AI capabilities to specific
phases likely to benefit, identifying defense gaps.
This reveals high-priority areas for threat detec
Intelligence Gathering
Infection Vectors
10
A Framework for Evaluating Emerging Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
100.00%
75.00%
Solve Rate
50.00%
25.00%
0.00%
Figure 11 | Challenge solve rates as a function of
difficulty level.
tion or mitigation by highlighting attack patterns
most likely to change due to AI. Our evaluations
showed high scores for evasion and operational
security (maintaining persistence, evading de
tection post-access), primarily relevant in later
stages like Installation (e.g., side-loading, living
off-the-land, disabling security) and C2 (e.g., en
crypted channels, hiding traffic). The results sug
gest moderate effectiveness in aiding attackers
maintain access undetected.
Development and Deployment of Targeted
Mitigations. After mapping capabilities and as
sessing gaps, we develop targeted safeguards
(safety fine-tuning, misuse filtering, response pro
tocols) following our Frontier Safety Framework
Google DeepMind (2025). Mitigation robustness
is assessed via assurance evaluations, threat mod
eling, and safety cases (Goemans et al., 2024),
considering misuse likelihood and consequences.
We periodically assess safeguards through red
teaming and update threat models with new cy
ber capability evaluations, as capabilities and tac
tics evolve.
Grounding AI-enabled Adversary Emulation.
The framework also informs proactive adversary
emulation. Adversary emulation assesses secu
rity by applying threat intelligence about spe
cific adversary TTPs to emulate threats, verify
ing detection/mitigation across the attack chain.
Our framework helps red teams more accurately
model AI-enabled adversary behavior (Figure 13).
Combining knowledge of adversary TTPs, preva
lence of AI use in specific phases (Figure 6), and
Srawman
Easy
Medium
Difficulty
Hard
evidence of AI-enabled cost reduction (Figure 12)
allows creation of more realistic emulation scenar
ios to test defenses against AI-leveraging actors.
Benchmarking Defenses. The approach can
benchmark defense effectiveness by assessing
costs imposed on leveraging AI for specific at
tack phases (Figure 14). Cyber defense aims to
increase attacker costs. While various defenses ex
ist against AI-enabled attacks (model-level, post
deployment), a comprehensive framework for
evaluating them across the attack chain is lacking.
Our framework can assess intervention effective
ness in making AI-enabled attacks less efficient,
potentially deterring them.
7. Related Work
AI has long been integral to cybersecurity, from
malware detection to network analysis using pre
dictive models. Recent frontier AI developments
spurred research into defensive applications: vul
nerability identification (Akuthota et al., 2023; Al
Karaki et al., 2024; Du et al., 2024; Li et al., 2021;
Lu et al., 2024), incident summarization (Ami
nanto et al., 2020; Ban et al., 2023; Khare et al.,
2023), incident response (Hays and White, 2024),
and other foundational tasks (Alam et al., 2024).
DARPA’sAIxCCcompetition(DARPA,2025)show
cased autonomous systems finding, exploiting,
and fixing vulnerabilities (Du et al., 2024; Ris
tea et al., 2024; Ruan et al., 2024). However,
the dual-use nature of cyber capabilities necessi
tates robust risk understanding and management.
Consequently, research has grown on methods to
evaluate potential risks of capable AI systems in
cyber.
7.1. Capture-the-Flag Challenges
CTF challenges are the most common method
for evaluating LLM offensive cyber capabilities.
LLMs interface with CTF environments to solve
security puzzles (cryptography, reverse engineer
ing, web exploitation, etc.) by finding hidden
’flags’. Numerous works employ CTF benchmarks,
11
A Framework for Evaluating Emerging Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
Proprietary 
Reconnaissance Weaponization Delivery Exploitation Installation Command and Control Actions on Objectives
Phishing
Malware
Denial-of-Service (DoS)
Man-in-the-Middle (MitM)
SQL Injection
Zero-Day Attack
Figure 12 | Heatmap illustrating potential cost reduction across attack chain phases based on current
model capability evaluations.
Figure 13 | Framework enabling red teams to better model AI-enabled adversary behavior for testing
defenses by generating emulation plans combining TTP knowledge with AI-enabled cost reduction
evidence.
including PentestGPT (Deng et al., 2023), Cyber
SecEval 3 (Bhatt et al., 2024; Wan et al., 2024),
Google DeepMind evaluations (Phuong et al.,
2024), PenHeal (Huang and Zhu, 2023), AutoAt
tacker (Xu et al., 2024), Cybench (Zhang et al.,
2024), EnIGMA (Abramovich et al., 2024), and
InterCode-CTF (Yang et al., 2023a). Some, like
CyberSecEval 3, assess "copilot" scenarios with
human operators using LLMs. Others focus on
narrow benchmarks like Linux privilege escala
tion (Ban et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2024), while
CyberSecEval 3 covers a broader range but still
limited attack phases. A drawback is the artificial
constraints and simplified scenarios compared to
real-world attacks (e.g., single target vs. com
plex enterprise networks), potentially skewing
capability assessment.
7.2. Multiple Choice and Free Response Tests
Multiple-choice question benchmarks offer mea
surability and scalability (Liu, 2023; Tann et al.,
2023; Tihanyi et al., 2024; Wan et al., 2024).
However, creating questions resistant to mem
orization that accurately reflect offensive cyber
is challenging. CyberSecEval also uses free
response questions evaluated by another LLM.
OCCULT (Kouremetis et al., 2025) introduced a
12
Proprietary 
A Framework for Evaluating Emerging Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
Initial access
Execution
Costs 
imposed by 
defenses 
and 
mitigations
Persistence
Privilege 
Escalation, etc.
Baseline: 
AI-enabled 
cost 
reduction 
(undefended 
model)
Figure 14 | Benchmarking defensive intervention effectiveness by assessing cost imposition on AI
enabled attacks across the attack chain.
multiple-choice benchmark for offensive tactic
knowledge.
7.3. Scaffolding and Capability Elicitation
Research is emerging on capability elicitation and
model scaffolding to measure upper-bound ca
pabilities. Some systems are lightweight wrap
pers for action-observation loops (e.g., Cybench
(Zhang et al., 2024), InterCode-CTF (Yang et al.,
2023a)). Others offer moderate scaffolding (e.g.,
Vulnhuntr (Du et al., 2024), AutoAttacker (Xu
et al., 2024)). More complex systems inte
grate extensive tools, multiple models, reason
ing components, and human feedback (e.g., SWE
Agent (Yang et al., 2024), PentestGPT (Deng
et al., 2023), Project Naptime (Google, 2025c),
EnIGMA (Abramovich et al., 2024), Incalmo
(Singer et al., 2025)). While current evaluation
approaches offer various tools, translating find
ings into actionable insights for defenders across
the attack chain remains unclear. This paper aims
to bridge this gap.
8. Conclusion
This paper introduced a novel framework for eval
uating frontier AI’s cyber capabilities, focusing on
the end-to-end attack chain. Grounded in real
world AI misuse attempts, it bridges evaluations
and defenses by helping prioritize targeted miti
gations. We curated attack chain archetypes and
a new benchmark, conducted bottleneck analy
sis to identify AI cost disruption potential, and
showed how the framework illuminates cost im
pacts, facilitates mitigation prioritization, bench
marks defense effectiveness, and grounds AI
enabled adversary emulation.
Our evaluations revealed that current AI cy
ber assessments often overlook critical areas like
evasion, detection avoidance, obfuscation, and
persistence, where AI shows significant potential.
We also confirm the importance of assessing mis
use for reconnaissance, widespread exploitation,
and long-term attacks.
Cybersecurity is dynamic, and AI will accel
erate this. We expect AI to alter attack costs,
prompting adversary adaptation. Our framework
is designed to evolve with AI capabilities. We
will continuously update attack chains, bottle
neck analyses, and uplift evaluations based on
real-world misuse and model evolution to pro
vide defenders with decision-relevant insights.
Mitigating misuse requires a community effort,
including robust developer safeguards and evolv
ing defensive techniques accounting for AI-driven
TTP changes.
Acknowledgement
We thank Lewis Ho for insightful reviews; the
larger Frontier Safety team for collaboration on
frontier evaluations; Ivan Petrov for discussions
on emerging capabilities; Jennifer Beroshi, Elie
Bursztein, Xerxes Dotiwalla, Gena Gibson, Myr
13
A Framework for Evaluating Emerging Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
iam Khan, Armin Senoner, Rohin Shah, Andy
Song, and Andreas Terzis for guidance; Alexan
dru Totolici, Ansh Chandnani, Ash Fox, Daniel
Fabian, Fu Chai, Maksim Shudrak, Mónica Car
ranza, Niru Ragupathy, Ryan Goosen, and Stefan
Friedli, for their valuable time and insight into re
source bottlenecks for historical cyberattack case
studies; Pattern Labs specifically to Dan Lahav,
Omer Nevo, Ofir Ohad, and Saar Tochner for
access to their evaluation platform and library;
Google’s Threat Intelligence Group for relevant
data and insights; and broadly Google for a sup
portive research environment.
References
L. Ablon and A. Bogart. Zero days, thousands of
nights. RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA,
2017.
T. Abramovich, M. Udeshi, M. Shao, K. Lieret,
H. Xi, K. Milner, S. Jancheska, J. Yang, C. E.
Jimenez, F. Khorrami, et al. Enigma: Enhanced
interactive generative model agent for ctf chal
lenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.16165, 2024.
V. Akuthota, R. Kasula, S. T. Sumona, M. Mohi
uddin, M. T. Reza, and M. M. Rahman. Vul
nerability detection and monitoring using llm.
In 2023 IEEE 9th International Women in En
gineering (WIE) Conference on Electrical and
Computer Engineering (WIECON-ECE), pages
309–314. IEEE, 2023.
J. Al-Karaki, M. A.-Z. Khan, and M. Omar. Explor
ing llms for malware detection: Review, frame
work design, and countermeasure approaches.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07587, 2024.
M. T. Alam, D. Bhusal, L. Nguyen, and N. Ras
togi. Ctibench: A benchmark for evaluating
llms in cyber threat intelligence. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.07599, 2024.
M. E. Aminanto, T. Ban, R. Isawa, T. Takahashi,
and D. Inoue. Threat alert prioritization using
isolation forest and stacked auto encoder with
day-forward-chaining analysis. IEEE Access, 8:
217977–217986, 2020.
Anthropic. Claude 3.7 sonnet system card,
2025.
URL https://anthropic.com/
claude-3-7-sonnet-system-card.
T. Ban, T. Takahashi, S. Ndichu, and D. Inoue.
Breaking alert fatigue: Ai-assisted siem frame
work for effective incident response. Applied
Sciences, 13(11):6610, 2023.
M. Bhatt, S. Chennabasappa, C. Nikolaidis,
S. Wan, I. Evtimov, D. Gabi, D. Song, F. Ah
mad, C. Aschermann, L. Fontana, et al. Purple
llama cyberseceval: A secure coding bench
mark for language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.04724, 2023.
M. Bhatt, S. Chennabasappa, Y. Li, C. Nikolaidis,
D. Song, S. Wan, F. Ahmad, C. Aschermann,
Y. Chen, D. Kapil, et al. Cyberseceval 2: A
wide-ranging cybersecurity evaluation suite
for large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.13161, 2024.
Center for Strategic and International
Studies.
Cyber events database,
2025.
URL https://cissm.umd.edu/
cyber-events-database.
DARPA. Aixcc: Ai cyber challenge, 2025. URL
https://aicyberchallenge.com/.
G. Deng, Y. Liu, V. Mayoral-Vilches, P. Liu, Y. Li,
Y. Xu, T. Zhang, Y. Liu, M. Pinzger, and
S. Rass. Pentestgpt: An llm-empowered au
tomatic penetration testing tool. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.06782, 2023.
L. Derczynski, E. Galinkin, J. Martin, S. Majumdar,
and N. Inie. garak: A framework for security
probing large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.11036, 2024.
X. Du, G. Zheng, K. Wang, J. Feng, W. Deng,
M. Liu, B. Chen, X. Peng, T. Ma, and Y. Lou.
Vul-rag: Enhancing llm-based vulnerability de
tection via knowledge-level rag. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.11147, 2024.
A. Goemans, M. D. Buhl, J. Schuett, T. Korbak,
J. Wang, B. Hilton, and G. Irving. Safety case
template for frontier ai: A cyber inability argu
ment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.08088, 2024.
14
A Framework for Evaluating Emerging Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
Google.
2025a.
Google’s secure ai framework,
URL https://safety.google/
cybersecurity-advancements/saif/.
Google. Adversarial misuse of generative ai,
2025b. URL https://cloud.google.com/
blog/topics/threat-intelligence/
adversarial-misuse-generative-ai.
Google.
Project naptime: Evaluating of
fensive security capabilities of large lan
guage models, 2025c. URL URl:https:
//googleprojectzero.blogspot.com/
2024/06/projectnaptime.Html.
Google DeepMind.
framework 2.0, 2025.
Frontier
safety
URL https:
M. Kouremetis, M. Dotter, A. Byrne, D. Mar
tin, E. Michalak, G. Russo, M. Threet, and
G. Zarrella. Occult: Evaluating large language
models for offensive cyber operation capabili
ties. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.15797, 2025.
Z. Li, D. Zou, S. Xu, X. Ou, H. Jin, S. Wang,
Z. Deng, and Y. Zhong. Vuldeepecker: A deep
learning-based system for vulnerability detec
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01681, 2018.
Z. Li, D. Zou, S. Xu, H. Jin, Y. Zhu, and Z. Chen.
Sysevr: A framework for using deep learning
to detect software vulnerabilities. IEEE Trans
actions on Dependable and Secure Computing,
19(4):2244–2258, 2021.
//deepmind.google/discover/blog/
updating-the-frontier-safety-framework/.
K. Haga, P. H. Meland, and G. Sindre. Breaking
the cyber kill chain by modelling resource costs.
Graphical Models for Security, 2020.
S. Hays and J. White. Employing llms for incident
response planning and review. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.01271, 2024.
J. Huang and Q. Zhu. Penheal: A two-stage llm
framework for automated pentesting and op
timal remediation. In Proceedings of the Work
shop on Autonomous Cybersecurity, pages 11
22, 2023.
InfoSecurity Magazine.
Uk ai safety insti
tute rebrands, 2025. URL https://www.
infosecurity-magazine.com/news/
uk-ai-safety-institute-rebrands.
A. Jaech, A. Kalai, A. Lerer, A. Richardson, A. El
Kishky, A. Low, A. Helyar, A. Madry, A. Beutel,
A. Carney, et al. Openai o1 system card. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.16720, 2024.
T. Johansmeyer. Perception shapes reality: How
views on financial market correlation affect cap
ital availability for cyber insurance. Journal of
Risk Management and Insurance, 2024.
A. Khare, S. Dutta, Z. Li, A. Solko-Breslin,
R. Alur, and M. Naik. Understanding the ef
fectiveness of large language models in de
tecting security vulnerabilities. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.16169, 2023.
Z. Liu. Secqa: A concise question-answering
dataset for evaluating large language mod
els in computer security. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.15838, 2023.
Lockheed Martin. Cyber kill chain, 2025.
URL
https://www.lockheedmartin.
com/en-us/capabilities/cyber/
cyber-kill-chain.html.
G. Lu, X. Ju, X. Chen, W. Pei, and Z. Cai. Grace:
Empowering llm-based software vulnerability
detection with graph structure and in-context
learning. Journal of Systems and Software, 212:
112031, 2024.
Mandiant.
Mandiant advantage: Threat
intelligence, 2025.
URL URl:https://
advantage.mandiant.com/.
M. Phuong, M. Aitchison, E. Catt, S. Cogan,
A. Kaskasoli, V. Krakovna, D. Lindner, M. Rahtz,
Y. Assael, S. Hodkinson, et al. Evaluating fron
tier models for dangerous capabilities. arxiv.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13793, 2024.
D. Ristea, V. Mavroudis, and C. Hicks. Ai cy
ber risk benchmark: Automated exploitation
capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21939,
2024.
H. Ruan, Y. Zhang, and A. Roychoudhury.
Specrover: Code intent extraction via llms.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.02232, 2024.
15
A Framework for Evaluating Emerging Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
M. Shao, S. Jancheska, M. Udeshi, B. Dolan
Gavitt, K. Milner, B. Chen, M. Yin, S. Garg, P. Kr
ishnamurthy, F. Khorrami, et al. Nyu ctf bench:
A scalable open-source benchmark dataset for
evaluating llms in offensive security. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:
57472–57498, 2024.
T. Shevlane, S. Farquhar, B. Garfinkel, M. Phuong,
J. Whittlestone, J. Leung, D. Kokotajlo, N. Mar
chal, M. Anderljung, N. Kolt, et al. Model
evaluation for extreme risks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.15324, 2023.
B. Singer, K. Lucas, L. Adiga, M. Jain, L. Bauer,
and V. Sekar. On the feasibility of using llms
to execute multistage network attacks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.16466, 2025.
B. E. Strom, A. Applebaum, D. P. Miller, K. C. Nick
els, A. G. Pennington, and C. B. Thomas. Mitre
att&ck: Design and philosophy. In Technical
report. The MITRE Corporation, 2018.
W. Tann, Y. Liu, J. Sim, C. Seah, and E. Chang.
Using large language models for cybersecu
rity capture-the-flag challenges and certifica
tion questions. arxiv 2023. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.10443, 2023.
N. Tihanyi, M. A. Ferrag, R. Jain, and M. Debbah.
Cybermetric: A benchmark dataset for evalu
ating large language models knowledge in cy
bersecurity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07688,
2024.
S. Wan, C. Nikolaidis, D. Song, D. Molnar,
J. Crnkovich, J. Grace, M. Bhatt, S. Chennabas
appa, S. Whitman, S. Ding, et al. Cyberseceval
3: Advancing the evaluation of cybersecurity
risks and capabilities in large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.01605, 2024.
J. Xu, J. W. Stokes, G. McDonald, X. Bai, D. Mar
shall, S. Wang, A. Swaminathan, and Z. Li.
Autoattacker: A large language model guided
system to implement automatic cyber-attacks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.01038, 2024.
J. Yang, A. Prabhakar, K. Narasimhan, and S. Yao.
Intercode: Standardizing and benchmarking
interactive coding with execution feedback. Ad
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
36:23826–23854, 2023a.
J. Yang, A. Prabhakar, S. Yao, K. Pei, and K. R.
Narasimhan. Language agents as hackers: Eval
uating cybersecurity skills with capture the flag.
In Multi-Agent Security Workshop@ NeurIPS’23,
2023b.
J. Yang, C. Jimenez, A. Wettig, K. Lieret, S. Yao,
K. Narasimhan, and O. Press. Swe-agent:
Agent-computer interfaces enable automated
software engineering. Advances in Neural Infor
mation Processing Systems, 37:50528–50652,
2024.
A. K.Zhang, N.Perry, R.Dulepet, J.Ji, C.Menders,
J. W. Lin, E. Jones, G. Hussein, S. Liu, D. Jasper,
et al. Cybench: A framework for evaluating
cybersecurity capabilities and risks of language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08926,
2024.
A. Bottleneck Analysis
A.1. Initial analysis of bottlenecks
We began the process of identifying an initial can
didate list of bottlenecks by ingesting Mandiant’s
Threat Intelligence dataset. This data source con
sists of a set of detailed deconstructions of cyber
attacks, timelines, and in-depth analysis of each
phase of how an attack unfolded. The sources of
this dataset include real-world data from Man
diant’s work helping organizations recover from
breaches, operational intelligence from monitor
ing and defending client networks, and adver
sarial intelligence obtained through in-depth re
search and analysis of threat actors.
Phishing and spear phishing
Bottlenecks:
• Gathering information about the target (in
dividual, organization, or group)
• Creating a malicious payload (e.g., malware
laden attachment, malicious link)
• Transmitting the malicious payload to the
target
16
A Framework for Evaluating Emerging Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
AI Uplift Potential:
• Automating Reconnaissance: AI-powered
tools can quickly gather and analyze vast
amounts of OSINT data to identify potential
victims and tailor phishing lures.
• Improving Weaponization: AI can generate
highly convincing phishing emails and web
sites, making it more difficult for users to
identify them as malicious.
• Personalizing Attacks: AI can analyze indi
vidual user behavior to craft highly targeted
phishing attacks that are more likely to be
successful.
Malware
Bottlenecks:
• Development of new malware: Requires re
verse engineering, understanding vulnerabil
ities, coding skills, and potentially evading
detection mechanisms.
• Evading detection: Signature-based detec
tion, sandboxing, behavioral analysis. Mal
ware needs to be polymorphic or metamor
phic to avoid detection.
• Distribution/Delivery: Getting the malware
onto target systems can be challenging. Ex
ploiting vulnerabilities, social engineering,
supply chain attacks.
• Maintaining persistence: Ensuring the mal
ware stays on the system even after reboots
or security scans.
• CommandandControl (C2) communication:
Establishing and maintaining covert commu
nication channels for control and data exfil
tration.
AI Uplift Potential:
• Automated malware generation: AI can au
tomate the creation of new malware vari
ants, including polymorphic and metamor
phic malware to evade signature-based de
tection.
• Intelligent evasion techniques: AI can learn
and develop techniques to evade sandboxing
and behavioral analysis by mimicking benign
behavior or detecting sandbox environments.
• Automated vulnerability exploitation: AI can
be used to find and exploit vulnerabilities to
deliver and install malware automatically.
• Enhanced C2 communication: AI can estab
lish more resilient and stealthy C2 channels,
potentially using techniques like domain gen
eration algorithms (DGAs) or encrypted com
munications that adapt to network condi
tions.
• Targeted malware: AI can tailor malware
payloads and behaviors to specific targets,
increasing effectiveness and reducing detec
tion.
Denial-of-Service (DoS)
Bottlenecks:
• Amplification: Generating enough traffic to
overwhelm a target infrastructure can be dif
ficult without amplification techniques.
• Bypassing mitigation strategies: Rate limit
ing, firewalls, intrusion detection/prevention
systems, content delivery networks (CDNs).
• Maintaining attack persistence: Keeping the
attack going continuously can be resource
intensive, and mitigation strategies might
eventually become effective.
• Attribution and anonymity: Hiding the
source of the attack can be challenging and
important for avoiding repercussions.
AI Uplift Potential:
• Intelligent amplification attacks: AI could
optimize amplification techniques to maxi
mize the impact of DoS attacks with fewer
resources, potentially by dynamically adapt
ing attack vectors.
• Automated DDoS orchestration: AI can auto
mate the orchestration of large-scale DDoS
attacks, managing botnets and attack vectors
more efficiently.
• Evasionofmitigation: AI can learn and adapt
to bypass rate limiting, firewalls, and other
mitigation strategies by identifying weak
nesses in defensive systems and dynamically
changing attack patterns.
• Creation of more complex and stealthy DoS
attacks: AI might enable development of
17
A Framework for Evaluating Emerging Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
application-layer DoS attacks that are harder
to detect and mitigate than simple volumet
ric attacks.
• Autonomous botnet management: AI could
manage botnets more autonomously and ef
fectively, improving their resilience and at
tack capabilities.
Man-in-the-Middle (MitM)
Bottlenecks:
• Network positioning: Gaining a position on
the network path between two communicat
ing parties (e.g., ARP poisoning, rogue Wi-Fi
access points).
• Traffic interception: Capturing and poten
tially decrypting network traffic. Encryption
(HTTPS, TLS) makes interception and de
cryption harder.
• Real-time traffic analysis: Analyzing inter
cepted traffic in real-time to extract valuable
information or identify opportunities for ma
nipulation.
• Traffic manipulation/injection: Modifying
traffic without being detected, which re
quires understanding the protocols and ap
plication logic.
• Maintaining stealth: Avoiding detection
while intercepting and potentially manipu
lating traffic.
AI Uplift Potential:
• Automated network positioning: AI can au
tomate network reconnaissance and identify
optimal positions for MitM attacks.
• Intelligent traffic analysis: AI can perform
deep packet inspection and real-time analy
sis of encrypted traffic to identify patterns,
vulnerabilities, or sensitive data even with
out full decryption, potentially using tech
niques like traffic analysis and machine learn
ing.
• Dynamic traffic manipulation: AI could au
tomate the dynamic manipulation of traffic
based on real-time analysis, enabling more
sophisticated and context-aware attacks.
• Bypassing encryption or finding weaknesses
in implementations: AI could potentially find
subtle weaknesses in encryption protocols or
implementations that can be exploited for
partial or full decryption in certain scenarios.
• Automated injection of malicious content:
AI can inject malicious content into traffic
streams in a way that is less likely to be
detected and more likely to achieve the at
tacker’s objectives
. SQL Injection
Bottlenecks:
• Finding vulnerable parameters: Identifying
input fields in web applications that are vul
nerable to SQL injection.
• Crafting effective injection payloads: Devel
oping SQL queries that can bypass input
validation and achieve the desired outcome
(data exfiltration, modification, etc.).
• Bypassing web application firewalls (WAFs):
WAFs are designed to detect and block com
mon SQL injection attacks.
• Exploiting complex SQL injection scenarios:
Blind SQL injection, time-based injection,
second-order injection can be more complex
to exploit.
• Automating the exploitation process: Manu
ally testing for and exploiting SQL injection
can be time-consuming.
AI Uplift Potential:
• Automated vulnerability scanning and iden
tification: AI can crawl web applications and
automatically identify potential SQL injec
tion vulnerabilities with greater accuracy and
speed.
• Intelligent payload crafting: AI can generate
SQL injection payloads that are more likely
to bypass input validation and WAFs, poten
tially using techniques like mutation and ad
versarial examples.
• Automated exploitation of complex scenar
ios: AI can automate the exploitation of
blind, time-based, and second-order SQL in
jection vulnerabilities, significantly reducing
the time and effort required.
18
A Framework for Evaluating Emerging Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
• Learning WAF evasion techniques: AI can
learn from WAF responses and develop eva
sion techniques that are more effective.
• Optimized data exfiltration: AI can optimize
data exfiltration strategies after successful
SQL injection to minimize detection andmax
imize data retrieved.
Zero-Day Attack
Bottlenecks:
• Vulnerability discovery: Finding previously
unknownvulnerabilities is extremely difficult
and time-consuming, requiring deep exper
tise and resources.
• Exploit development: Creating a reliable ex
ploit for a zero-day vulnerability that works
across different systems and is not easily de
tected.
• Weaponization and delivery before patching:
Attacks need to be carried out before the vul
nerability is publicly disclosed and patched,
requiring speed and stealth.
• Maintaining secrecy of the vulnerability:
Keeping the zero-day vulnerability secret is
crucial for its long-term effectiveness.
• Target selection and impact maximization:
Choosing targets where the zero-day exploit
will have maximum impact.
AI Uplift Potential for Zero-Day Attacks:
• Accelerated vulnerability discovery: AI can
analyze codebases and software systems at
scale to identify potential zero-day vulnera
bilities much faster than traditional methods,
using techniques like fuzzing, symbolic ex
ecution, and machine learning for anomaly
detection in code.
• Automated exploit generation: AI can auto
mate the process of generating exploits for
discovered vulnerabilities, reducing the time
and attack barrier for exploit development.
• Proactive vulnerability prediction: AI might
be able to predict potential vulnerability
types or locations in software based on code
patterns and past vulnerability data, guiding
vulnerability research efforts.
• Stealthy zero-day weaponization: AI can
help create zero-day exploits and delivery
mechanisms that are more stealthy and
harder to detect, maximizing the window
of opportunity before patching.
• Targeted zero-day attacks: AI can analyze
potential targets and identify those where a
specific zero-day exploit
A.2. Validating Attack Bottlenecks via Expert
Survey
To validate potential bottlenecks in cyberattacks,
we first selected thirteen historical case studies ex
hibiting exceptionally high impact from a broader
set of representative attack chains. The selection
criteria included attacks that caused, or had the
potential to cause, catastrophic loss of life, sig
nificant economic damage, or state-level cyber
espionage. (See Figure 15). Assessing the eco
nomic impact of attacks is inherently difficult;
company reports might overestimate losses (as
revenue may shift rather than disappear), while
negative supply chain effects can be underesti
mated. Therefore, impact assessment requires
considerable subjective judgment.
We identified suitable case studies using
sources such as the Kent Academic Repository (Jo
hansmeyer, 2024), CSIS reports, Florian Roth’s
summaries, security company publications, and
media reports. To focus on the modern defensive
landscape, we excluded attacks that occurred be
fore 2010.
Next, we recruited ten offensive security ex
perts from Google. They estimated the resources
required to replicate the selected attacks under
specific assumptions: the attack would be per
formed by a hypothetical median-skilled cyber ex
pert at Google, without using AI tools. This stan
dardization helps ensure comparable estimates
regardless of the original attacker’s capabilities.
The survey proceeded as follows:
1. Each expert estimated the resources needed
for each phase of two distinct case studies.
We provided detailed descriptions of the at
tacker’s actions and achieved outcomes for
every phase.
19
A Framework for Evaluating Emerging Cyberattack Capabilities of AI
Figure 15 | Notable, high-impact case studies selected for expert verification.
2. Experts provided estimates in two forms:
human-days of effort for a median expert,
and direct monetary expenses (e.g., hard
ware procurement, infrastructure costs).
They also rated their confidence (low,
medium, high) for each estimate. Follow
ing Haga et al. (2020), we broke down at
tacks into phases to simplify estimation and
requested cost intervals rather than point
estimates to improve generalizability.
3. To establish a plausible upper bound on
phase efficiency and avoid assuming repli
cation of historical attacker errors, experts
also estimated the minimum resources each
phase might require for a sophisticated ad
versary.
4. This process resulted in seven case studies
reviewed by two experts and six reviewed
by one. We then conducted a consensus
building exercise: for doubly-reviewed cases,
experts analyzed their peer’s estimates and
reasoning and could optionally revise their
converted them to dollar costs by multiplying by
a salary variable ($500k); for ease of cost com
parison between phases, we then calculated the
percent of the overall resourcing estimate each
phase accounted for. We define a ’bottleneck’ as
any phase requiring at least 10% of the total esti
mated resources for the attack.
Our key findings were that:
• Weaponization and Reconnaissance were
very common bottlenecks, and also com
manded the overall highest amount of re
sourcing (averaged across scenarios where
they were bottlenecks)
• For major data breaches, bottlenecks were
more evenly distributed across phases com
pared to other attack types
• Averages across case studies:– Weaponization
(n=9,
$206.7k)– Reconnaissance (n=7,
own; for singly-reviewed cases, a second ex
pert provided anonymous feedback on the
initial assessment.
35.94%,
19.20%,
$44.8k)– Actions on Objectives (n=5, 17.60%,
$525k; 11.00%, $16.5k when exclud
This survey methodology helps determine the
relative costs of different attack phases and iden
tify dominant bottlenecks. Understanding these
bottlenecks allows defenders to qualitatively as
sess how enhancing defenses at one stage might
affect the overall attack economics and potentially
anticipate significant shifts in attack costs.
We took the initial human-day estimates and
ing SolarWinds outlier)– Exploitation (n=4, 9.82%, $19.3k)– Delivery (n=4, 8.30%, $15.8k)– C2(n=3, 6.40%, $17.3k)– Installation (n=2, 3.20%, $8.3k




________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________



The	Self-Driving	Portfolio:		
Agentic	Architecture	for	Institutional	Asset	Management	
Andrew	Ang†	
Nazym	Azimbayev	
Andrey	Kim	
This	Draft:	April	1,	2026	
Agentic	AI	shifts	the	investor's	role	from	analytical	execution	to	oversight.	We	present	an	
agentic	strategic	asset	allocation	pipeline	in	which	approximately	50	specialized	agents	
produce	capital	market	assumptions,	construct	portfolios	using	over	20	competing	methods,	
and	critique	and	vote	on	each	other's	output.	A	researcher	agent	proposes	new	portfolio	
construction	methods	not	yet	represented,	and	a	meta-agent	compares	past	forecasts	against	
realized	returns	and	rewrites	agent	code	and	prompts	to	improve	future	performance.	The	
entire	pipeline	is	governed	by	the	Investment	Policy	Statement—the	same	document	that	
guides	human	portfolio	managers	can	now	constrain	and	direct	autonomous	agents.	
Keywords:	Strategic	asset	allocation	(SAA),	portfolio	construction,	capital	market	
assumptions	(CMAs),	agentic	AI,	large	language	models	(LLMs),	LLM-as-judge,	
autonomous	agents,	multi-agent	systems,	investment	policy	statement,	institutional	
investing,	portfolio	optimization,	ensemble	methods	
JEL	Codes:	C45,	C63,	D81,	G11,	G17,	G23,	O33.		
†	Andrew	Ang	is	at	Tau	Balance	and	an	adjunct	professor	at	Columbia	University,	
www.andrewangphd.com.	Nazym	Azimbayev,	nazym@altbridge.ai,	and	Andrey	Kim,	
kimandr@altbridge.ai,	are	at	Altbridge.		
1. Introduction	
The	most	binding	constraint	in	institutional	asset	management	is	not	data	availability	or	
model	sophistication,	but	the	finite	bandwidth	of	human	decision-makers.1	A	CIO	can	
meaningfully	oversee	perhaps	10	to	15	investment	departments,	often	organized	along	the	
lines	of	the	major	asset	classes.	A	fundamental	analyst	can	deeply	cover	10	to	20	stocks.	An	
investment	committee	meets	monthly	or	quarterly,	deliberates	for	a	few	hours,	and	ratifies	
decisions	that	must	hold	until	the	next	meeting.	These	constraints	reflect	organizational	
constraints	rather	than	analytical	or	competence	shortcomings.	The	consequence	is	a	
potential	mismatch	between	the	attention	and	time	that	human-led	investment	processes	
can	supply	and	the	complexity	and	speed	that	modern	multi-asset	markets	demand.		
Large	language	model	(LLM)	based	autonomous	agents	relax	this	constraint.	An	agent	
in	this	context	is	not	simply	a	model	that	responds	to	a	prompt;	it	is	a	goal-oriented	software	
entity	that	uses	tools	(or	runs	scripts),	executes	multi-step	reasoning,	and	produces	
structured	outputs	(Wang	et	al.	2024;	Masterman	et	al.	2024).	A	single	agent	can	execute	a	
complete	set	of	Capital	Market	Assumptions	(CMAs)—for	multiple	asset	classes	in	minutes	
using	historical	macro	and	price	data,	and	textual	and	web	data.	Multiple	agents	can	operate	
in	parallel:	one	agent	per	asset	class,	one	agent	per	stock,	one	agent	per	a	particular	portfolio	
construction	technique.	The	result	is	an	investment	process	that	can	be	broader,	deeper,	and	
faster	than	what	a	human	team	can	achieve	alone.	
Five	capabilities	distinguish	agentic	architectures	from	traditional	human-based	
investment	processes.	First,	scale:	agents	can	run	dozens,	and	potentially	hundreds,	of	
parallel	asset-class	analyses	and	portfolio	construction	methods	simultaneously.	Second,	
structured	deliberation:	agents	can	debate,	peer	review,	and	vote	on	each	other’s	
proposals,	embedding	the	productive	conflict	of	an	investment	committee	into	a	
reproducible	protocol	(Du	et	al.	2023;	Chen	et	al.	2025).	Third,	natural-language	audit	
trails:	every	agent	recommendation	or	decision	is	accompanied	with	written	justifications	
that	can	be	used	for	ex	post	review	and	satisfy	fiduciary	requirements	for	explainability.	
Fourth,	composable	expertise:	adding	a	specialist	agent—a	forensic	accounting	module,	or	
1 In	the	rational	inattention	tradition	following	Sims	(2003),	decision-makers	optimally	ration	cognitive	
capacity	rather	than	process	all	available	signals.	
1	
a	new	portfolio	construction	agent—can	increase	the	system’s	capability	without	
redesigning	the	pipeline.	Fifth,	governable	delegation:	authority	can	be	encoded	as	explicit	
objectives,	constraints,	or	escalation	triggers,	allowing	institutions	to	increase	automation	
while	preserving	human	accountability	over	final	decisions. 
In	this	paper	we	describe	an	agentic	strategic	asset	allocation	(SAA)	pipeline	that	
coordinates	approximately	50	specialized	agents	through	each	stage:	macro	regime	
classification,	asset-class	analysis,	covariance	estimation,	portfolio	construction,	multi-agent	
peer	review	and	voting,	risk	assessment,	and	CIO-level	ensemble	combination.	The	design	
embeds	structured	deliberation—randomized	peer	review,	Borda-count	voting,	and	an	
adversarial	diversifier—into	the	portfolio	construction	process.	The	agentic	architecture	
also	allows	agents	to	acquire	new	skills.		
The	use	of	agentic	AI	will	transform	the	role	of	human	decision-making	in	
investments.	Johnson	et	al.	(2017)	identify	five	levels	of	human	control	in	automated	
systems:	direct	control,	augmented	control,	parametric	control,	goal-oriented	control,	and	
mission-capable	control.2	At	each	successive	level,	the	human	operates	at	a	higher	level	of	
abstraction.	In	our	investment	case,	the	human	moves	from	selecting	a	multiple	vs	building
block	model	to	set	CMAs	(direct	control)	to	selecting	which	portfolio	construction	methods	
to	run	and	their	parameter	bounds	(parametric	control)	to	writing	the	Investment	Policy	
Statement	(IPS)	that	governs	an	entire	multi-agent	pipeline	(goal-oriented	control).	The	
human’s	role	is	not	diminished;	it	is	elevated,	and	the	human	becomes	the	architect	of	
designing	and	overseeing	an	investment	workflow.	Our	architecture	compresses	workflows	
that	traditionally	require	teams	of	specialists	working	over	days	or	weeks	into	automated	
runs	completed	in	minutes,	while	incorporating	an	agent	that	continuously	and	
autonomously	discovers	and	proposes	new	portfolio	construction	techniques.		
2 Azimbayev	et	al.	(2025)	propose	a	framework	for	classifying	autonomous	investing	based	on		the	SAE	J3016	
standard	for	autonomous	driving.	Their	framework	classifies	AI	investment	systems	by	degree	of	autonomy:	
from	L0	(no	automation;	the	human	performs	the	entire	investment	task)	through	L3	(conditional	automation;	
the	system	recommends	within	defined	parameters	and	the	human	approves)	to	L5	(full	autonomy	across	all	
market	conditions).	The	architectures	described	in	this	paper	operate	at	L3	and	L4.	Feng,	McDonald,	and	Zhang	
(2025)	also	define	different	levels	of	autonomy	of	AI	agents,	but	characterize	them	in	how	a	human	interacts	
with	the	agents:	as	operator,	collaborator,	consultant,	approver,	or	observer.		
2	
2. Related	Literature	
Our	work	is	related	to	an	exploding	literature	on	agentic	AI	that	combines	a	language	model	
with	persistent	memory,	tool	access,	and	goal-directed	planning	to	autonomously	execute	
multi-step	tasks.	The	ReAct	framework	(Yao	et	al.	2023)	demonstrates	that	incorporating	
reasoning	traces	with	calls	to	tools	improves	execution	quality	relative	to	prompting	alone.	
Subsequent	work	expands	the	agent	toolkit	to	include	structured	planning	(Huang	et	al.	
2024a),	code	execution,	web	retrieval,	API	calls	and	other	tools—all	giving	rise	to	a	growing	
taxonomy	of	agent	architectures	(Wang	et	al.	2024;	Masterman	et	al.	2024;	Guo	et	al.	2025;	
Li	et	al.	2025).	What	distinguishes	an	agent	from	a	conventional	LLM	query	is	persistence:	
the	agent	maintains	state	across	steps,	adapts	its	strategy	based	on	intermediate	results,	and	
produces	structured	outputs	that	downstream	processes	can	consume.	
When	multiple	agents	interact,	new	capabilities	emerge.	Du	et	al.	(2023)	show	that	
multi-agent	debate—where	agents	critique	and	revise	each	other’s	responses—improves	
both	factual	accuracy	and	reasoning	quality	beyond	what	any	single	agent	achieves.	Chen	et	
al.	(2025)	compare	debate	and	voting	as	aggregation	mechanisms	and	find	that	voting	is	
more	robust	when	agents	hold	diverse	priors,	while	debate	excels	at	error	correction	within	
a	shared	framework.	Chuang	et	al.	(2024)	demonstrate	that	ensembles	of	LLM	agents	can	
match	or	exceed	human	crowd	accuracy	in	prediction	tasks,	a	finding	consistent	with	the	
classical	econometrics	literature	that	consensus	forecasts	can	dominate	individual	model	
forecasts	(Bates	and	Granger	1969;	Clemen	1989).	Huang	et	al.	(2024b)	study	how	LLM	
agents	behave	under	voting	rules,	finding	that	aggregation	method	can	affect	outcome	
quality.	These	results	motivate	the	structured	deliberation	protocol	in	our	SAA	pipeline,	
which	combines	peer	review,	Borda-count	voting,	and	regime-dependent	scoring	to	
aggregate	the	judgments	of	our	portfolio	construction	agents.	On	the	infrastructure	side,	
frameworks	such	as	AutoGen	(Wu	et	al.	2023),	CAMEL	(Li	et	al.	2023),	MetaGPT	(Hong	et	al.	
2023),	and	OpenClaw	(Steinberger	et	al.	2026)	provide	the	orchestration	layer—agent-to
agent	messaging,	role	assignment,	and	workflow	management—that	makes	such	multi
agent	pipelines	implementable	as	production	systems	rather	than	research	prototypes.	
A	growing	body	of	work	applies	LLM	agents	to	financial	tasks.	Zhao	et	al.	(2025)	
deploy	three	specialist	agents	(fundamental,	sentiment,	and	valuation)	that	collaborate	and	
3	
debate	to	produce	equity	research	reports	in	less	than	a	minute.	Xiao,	Soltanolkotabi,	and	Jia	
(2024)	build	a	multi-agent	trading	system	with	distinct	analyst,	researcher,	and	trader	roles.	
Yu,	Yang,	and	Wang	(2024)	introduce	conceptual	verbal	reinforcement	to	improve	financial	
decision-making	in	a	multi-agent	setting,	and	Zhang,	Li,	and	Zhong	(2024)	demonstrate	a	
multimodal	agent	capable	of	processing	charts,	tables,	and	text	for	trading	decisions.	Xing	et	
al.	(2024)	present	FinRobot,	an	orchestrator	agent	that	delegates	equity	research	tasks—
data	retrieval,	financial	analysis,	report	generation—to	specialist	sub-agents.	These	
architectures	are	not	intended	for	SAA,	do	not	incorporate	formal	voting	or	peer-review	
protocols	among	agents	or	autonomous	discovery	of	new	portfolio	construction	methods,	
and	do	not	center	governance	on	an	IPS—features	that	are	central	to	our	agentic	SAA	
pipeline.	
3. Agentic	Strategic	Asset	Allocation		
The	typical	SAA	workflow	at	an	institutional	investor	starts	with	the	Investment	Policy	
Statement	(IPS),	which	encodes	the	institution's	objectives,	risk	tolerance,	time	horizon,	and	
permissible	asset	classes.	In	the	next	layer,	investment	staff	or	consultants	then	produce	
Capital	Market	Assumptions	(CMAs)—expected	returns,	volatilities,	and	correlations	for	
each	asset	class—drawing	on	macroeconomic	forecasts,	valuation	models,	and	historical	
data.	The	CMAs	then	feed	into	a	portfolio	construction	step	that	produces	target	weights,	
most	commonly	through	some	variant	of	mean-variance	optimization	(Markowitz	1952),	
with	various	considerations	in	the	IPS	treated	as	constraints.	The	weights	are	then	
implemented	through	trading,	and	the	portfolio	is	monitored	and	periodically	rebalanced.	
CMAs	are	typically	produced	by	a	research	team,	or	are	outsourced	to	consultants	or	
asset	management	firms,	covering	an	asset-class	universe	that	spans	equities,	fixed	income,	
real	assets,	and	alternatives	across	multiple	geographies.	The	process	to	set	CMAs	involves	
loading	market	data,	computing	historical	statistics,	assessing	the	macro	environment,	
searching	for	current	valuations	and	flows,	forming	a	forward-looking	view,	and	writing	a	
recommendation—a	process	that	takes	hours	per	asset	class.	The	same	team	often	runs	a	
single	portfolio	construction	method	because	running	and	comparing	many	methods	is	too	
4	
time-consuming.	The	investment	committee	reviews	one	recommended	portfolio,	typically	
with	a	sensitivity	analysis.	The	entire	cycle	runs	quarterly	or	semi-annually.	The	breadth	of	
analysis	is	constrained	by	staffing,	there	is	limited	diversity	of	portfolio	construction	
approaches,	and	the	frequency	of	review	is	constrained	by	committee	calendars.	There	is	
little	room	for	structured	debate	among	competing	methodologies,	systematic	peer	review	
of	assumptions,	or	rapid	adaptation	to	regime	changes.	
3.1 Agentic	Pipeline	
The	agentic	architecture	changes	the	traditional	workflow	into	tasks	assigned	to	one	or	more	
specialized	agents,	coordinated	by	a	workflow	manager.	Exhibit	1	illustrates	the	pipeline.	
The	IPS	remains	the	governing	document—written	by	humans,	encoding	objectives	and	
constraints—but	every	subsequent	stage	is	executed	by	agents	operating	within	IPS	bounds.	
The	pipeline	proceeds	in	six	steps:	
1. A	macro	agent	classifies	the	current	economic	regime	(expansion,	late-cycle,	
recession,	or	recovery)	based	on	macro	and	market	indicators,	providing	a	regime	
signal	that	conditions	all	downstream	analysis.		
2. Asset	class	agents	run	in	parallel,	each	producing	CMAs—an	expected	return,	a	
volatility	estimate,	and	a	confidence	level—along	with	a	written	investment-case	
memo	for	its	assigned	asset	class.		
3. A	covariance	agent	estimates	the	asset	class	covariance	matrix	using	historical	data	
and	macro	forecasts.		
4. Portfolio	construction	(PC)	agents	take	the	CMAs	from	step	(2)	and	the	covariance	
matrix	from	step	(3)	to	independently	construct	a	proposed	portfolio,	using	methods	
ranging	from	equal-weight	and	inverse-volatility	heuristics	to	mean-variance	
optimization,	risk	parity,	hierarchical	risk	parity,	and	Total	Portfolio	Allocation	
methods.		
5. A	multi-agent	strategy	review	subjects	all	PC	proposals	to	peer	review,	risk	
assessment,	and	voting.		
5	
Exhibit 1: Agentic Strategic Asset Allocation Architecture  
6. A	CIO	agent	scores,	combines,	and	selects	from	the	surviving	proposals	using	an	
ensemble	of	seven	combination	methods.	The	CIO	agent	produces	a	board	memo	
summarizing	the	recommendation,	the	reasoning,	and	the	dissenting	views.	
What	distinguishes	the	agentic	SAA	workflow	from	a	conventional	quantitative	SAA	
workflow	is	not	just	parallelism—running	two	dozen	optimizers	simultaneously	is	trivial—
but	the	fact	that	each	agent	reasons	in	natural	language,	produces	a	written	justification	for	
its	output,	and	can	read	and	respond	to	the	outputs	of	other	agents.	The	strategy	review,	
described	in	Section	3.4,	is	a	structured	deliberation	in	which	agents	critique,	vote	on,	and	
revise	each	other's	proposals.	No	traditional	optimizer	framework	does	this.	
3.2 Anatomy	of	SAA	agents	
In	our	agentic	architecture,	each	step	of	the	traditional	SAA	process	is	assigned	to	one	or	
more	specialized	agents.	An	agent	in	this	system	is	defined	by	four	components:	a	
description,	a	set	of	scripts,	a	collection	of	skills,	and	a	structured	output	contract. 
6	
The	description	is	a	markdown	document	that	defines	the	agent's	role,	its	position	in	
the	pipeline,	and	its	step-by-step	workflow.	It	specifies	what	inputs	the	agent	consumes,	
what	analyses	it	performs,	and	what	outputs	it	produces.	This	description	is	read	by	the	LLM	
at	runtime—it	is	effectively	the	agent's	job	description,	written	in	natural	language	rather	
than	code.	
The	scripts	are	Python	programs	that	handle	computation.	An	agent	does	not	
perform	arithmetic	or	optimization	in	the	language	model	itself;	it	calls	scripts	that	fetch	data	
from	APIs,	compute	historical	statistics,	build	expected-return	models,	or	run	portfolio	
optimizers.	The	separation	is	deliberate:	the	LLM	handles	judgment,	interpretation,	and	
narrative;	the	scripts	handle	computation.	This	division	ensures	numerical	precision	while	
preserving	the	agent's	ability	to	reason	about	results.	
The	skills	are	reusable	knowledge	modules—each	is	a	folder	containing	methodology	
documentation	and	associated	scripts—that	multiple	agents	can	share.	For	example,	a	
macro-regime	skill	contains	the	regime	classification	framework	(four	regimes:	expansion,	
late-cycle,	recession,	recovery,	defined	by	growth,	inflation,	monetary	policy,	and	financial	
conditions	scores),	the	scoring	methodology,	and	the	data-fetching	script.	An	historical
analysis	skill	provides	functions	for	loading	returns,	computing	statistics,	and	generating	
signals.	Skills	are	the	mechanism	through	which	institutional	knowledge	—	valuation	
frameworks,	risk	metrics,	regime	definitions	—	is	encoded	and	made	available	to	agents.	
The	output	contract	specifies	the	structured	files	the	agent	must	produce:	JSON	files	
conforming	to	defined	schemas	(for	machine	consumption	by	downstream	agents)	and	
markdown	reports	(for	human	review).	Every	agent	produces	both	quantitative	outputs	and	
natural-language	analysis,	ensuring	that	the	pipeline	generates	audit	trails	at	every	step.	
To	illustrate,	consider	the	macro	agent,	which	runs	first	in	the	pipeline.	Its	description	
instructs	it	to	first	fetch	macro	and	market	data	via	a	Python	script	that	calls	a	data	API.	The	
agent	also	searches	the	web	for	real-time	readings	of	both	numeric	and	textual	information.	
With	the	data,	it	scores	four	dimensions—growth,	inflation,	monetary	policy,	and	financial	
conditions—using	a	weighted	scoring	framework	to	classify	the	current	regime	with	a		
7	
Exhibit 2: Asset Class (AC) Agents  
confidence	level	into	one	of	four	regimes:	expansion,	late-cycle,	recession,	or	recovery.		
Finally,	the	agent	writes	a	JSON	file	with	the	macro	regimes	and	a	narrative	report.	The	JSON	
output	is	consumed	by	all	downstream	asset-class	agents.		
3.3 Asset	Class	Agents	
Each	asset-class	agent	takes	the	macro	view	produced	by	the	macro	agent,	and	then	develops	
asset	class-specific	views.	Exhibit	2	illustrates	the	architecture.	A	feature	of	the	asset	class	
(AC)	agents	is	that	they	evaluate	CMAs	using	several	different	methods	and	select	one,	or	
combine	the	methods,	to	produce	the	final	set	of	expected	returns.	
Consider	the	US	Large	Cap	(US	LC)	agent,	which	analyzes	the	S&P	500.	Exhibit	3	
shows	a	condensed	version	of	the	US	LC	agent	configuration	illustrating	five	components:	
the	role	description,	the	required	skills,	the	workflow	with	script	calls	including	a	CMA	judge	
step	(see	below),	asset	class-specific	guidance,	and	the	structured	output	contract.	Each	
8	
 
Asset Class Analysis Agent — US Large Cap (S&P 500) 
Role: Produces 13-section investment case and capital market assumptions for US 
Large Cap equities (S&P 500) 
Slug: us-large-cap | BBG: SPTR Index | Category: US Equity | History: Jan 1990
present 
Macro sensitivity: Growth (+), Rates (−), Inflation (−), Dollar (+) 
Required skills: asset-class-report, historical-analysis, signal-generation, 
equity-analysis, cma-judge, apex-data-financial (fmp, finviz) 
Workflow: 
1. Load macro view (macro-view.json → regime, growth/inflation/policy 
scores) 
2. Historical analysis (returns, vol, drawdowns, correlations vs 12 other 
asset classes) 
3. Valuation & fundamentals (CAPE, P/E, earnings yield, ERP, market breadth) 
4. Technical signals (momentum, trend, mean reversion, relative momentum) 
5. Sentiment and external data via web search (fund flows, positioning) 
6. Build CMA: run 6 methods + auto-blend via cma_methods.py 
7. CMA Judge: LLM evaluates 7 candidates, selects final CMA with rationale 
8. Scenario analysis (bull/bear from method range) + 13-section report 
Key considerations (asset-class-specific guidance read at runtime): 
• S&P 500 is the benchmark—most investors compare everything against it 
• Concentration risk: top 10 stocks may represent 30%+ of index weight 
• AI/tech exposure: sector composition heavily tilted toward technology and 
growth 
• Buyback yield: significant CMA component (~1–3% annually) 
• Dollar strength impacts multinational earnings (negative for strong dollar 
on earnings) 
Output: cma_methods.json, cma.json, signals.json, historical_stats.json, 
scenarios.json, correlation_row.json, analysis.md 
Exhibit 3: US Large Cap Agent Configuration (condensed from agent description file) 
agent	has	its	own	description	file	with	appropriate	asset	class-specific	instructions.	For	US	
Small	Cap,	for	example,	the	key	considerations	include	taking	into	account	comparisons		
relative	to	large	cap	equities	and	corporate	debt.	For	investment	grade	corporates,	a	
different	agent	template	uses	a	fixed-income	CMA	builder	and	emphasizes	credit-spread	
duration	and	sector	concentration.	
9	
CMA Judge Skill (cma-judge/SKILL.md) 
Evaluates multiple CMA methods for an equity asset class and 
selects the final expected return estimate. 
Inputs: 
cma_methods.json — all method estimates with confidence scores 
signals.json — asset-level macro, technical, valuation signals 
macro-view.json — current regime, growth, inflation, policy 
historical_stats.json — trailing returns, volatility, drawdowns 
7 Candidate Methods: 
1. Historical ERP + Rf — long-run realized equity premium 
2. Regime-Adjusted — conditional premium for current macro regime 
3. BL Equilibrium — market-implied return from cap weights 
4. Inverse Gordon — yield + growth from current valuation 
5. Implied ERP — earnings yield as return proxy (CAPE-based) 
6. Survey/Analyst — expert consensus or macro agent view 
7. Auto-Blend — confidence-weighted average of methods 1-6 
Judgment Rules: 
Step 1: Assess method dispersion (tight <3pp / moderate 3-6pp / wide >6pp) 
Step 2: Apply regime logic (late-cycle → tilt valuation + regime-adj; 
expansion → auto-blend; recession → regime-adj + BL) 
Step 3: Check valuation context (PE >30x → tilt valuation methods; 
PE <12x → tilt historical + BL; normal → flag if they disagree) 
Step 4: Check signal alignment (confirm or hedge against method spread) 
Step 5: Select — pick one method, define custom weights, or accept blend 
Constraint: final estimate MUST be within [min_method, max_method]. 
Exhibit 4: CMA Judge Skill (condensed from cma-judge/SKILL.md)	
The	methods	used	by	the	US	LC	agent	to	compute	the	expected	return	are:	(1)	the	
historical	equity	risk	premium	added	to	the	current	risk-free	rate;	(2)	a	regime-adjusted	
historical	equity	risk	premium	that	conditions	on	the	current	macro	cycle;		
(3)	implied	expected	returns	consistent	with	Black–Litterman	(1992)	equilibrium	weights;	
(4)	an	inverse	Gordon	(1959)	building-block	model	following	Grinold	and	Kroner	(2002)	
that	sums	dividend	yield,	earnings	growth,	and	valuation	change;	(5)	the	implied	equity	risk	
premium	from	the	Campbell	and	Shiller	(1998)	CAPE;	and	(6)	consensus	survey	forecasts.	
Each	method	returns	a	point	estimate,	a	confidence	score	between	0	and	1,	a	component	
breakdown,	and	a	one-line	rationale.	The	agent	also	computes	a	confidence-weighted	blend,	
which	is	method	7.	All	seven	candidates	are	written	to	a	cma_methods.json	file	by	a	Python	
script;	no	LLM	judgment	is	involved	up	to	this	point.	
The	judgment	step	follows.	The	US	LC	agent	applies	a	structured	LLM-as-judge	
framework	(Zheng	et	al.	2023)	to	select	or	combine	the	final	estimate.	The	agent	reads	all	
10	
seven	candidate	estimates	alongside	the	macro	regime,	asset-level	signals,	and	historical	
statistics,	then	evaluates	which	methods'	assumptions	best	fit	the	current	environment.	It	
favors	valuation-based	methods	when	valuations	are	stretched,	tilts	toward	regime
conditional	estimates	in	late-cycle	or	recessionary	periods,	and	defaults	to	the	auto-blend	
when	methods	broadly	agree—subject	to	the	hard	constraint	that	the	final	estimate	must	lie	
within	the	range	of	the	candidate	methods	
Exhibit	4	summarizes	the	CMA	judge	skill—the	shared	instruction	set	read	by	every	
equity	asset	class	agent	at	the	judgment	step.	The	skill	defines	seven	candidate	methods,	a	
decision	framework	conditioned	on	macro	regime	and	valuation	context,	and	the	hard	
constraint	that	the	final	estimate	must	lie	within	the	method	range.	
3.4 Portfolio	Construction	(PC)	Agents	
The	CMAs	and	covariance	matrix	feed	into	20	portfolio	construction	(PC)	agents,	each	
implementing	a	distinct	optimization	objective.	The	first	19	PC	agents	run	in	parallel;	only	
the	adversarial	diversifier,	which	maximizes	tracking	variance	relative	to	the	ensemble	
centroid	of	the	other	agents,	executes	after	the	initial	19	have	finished.	The	agents	are	
organized	into	four	categories	summarized	in	Exhibit	5.		
The	first	category	are	heuristic	methods,	which	avoid	optimization-driven	estimation	
error	and	dominate	when	expected	returns	are	poorly	measured	(DeMiguel,	Garlappi,	and	
Uppal	2009).	The	second	category	are	return-optimized	methods	which	explicitly	use	return	
forecasts	from	the	asset	class	agents.	The	risk-structured	methods	optimize	risk	metrics	
without	explicit	return	forecasts,	on	the	premise	that	the	covariance	matrix	is	more	reliably	
estimated	than	expected	returns	(Merton	1980).	Non-traditional	methods	address	
limitations	of	variance-based	frameworks	by	optimizing	expected	shortfall,	drawdown	
profiles,	or	multi-factor	risk	budgets.	Among	the	methods	in	this	category	that	is	gaining	
popularity	among	institutional	investors	is	Total	Portfolio	Allocation	which	is	not	bound	by	
traditional	asset	classes	(see	Ang,	Brandt,	and	Denison	2014;	Gilmore	and	Simonian	2025).		
11	
Category	
Method	
Sample	Reference	
A.	Heuristic	
Equal	weight	(1/N)	
Market-cap	weight	
DeMiguel,	Garlappi,	and	Uppal	(2009)	
Inverse	volatility	
Sharpe	(1964)	
Kirby	and	Ostdiek	(2012)	
Inverse	variance	
Volatility	targeting	
Kirby	and	Ostdiek	(2012)	
Moreira	and	Muir	(2017)	
B.	Return-optimized	
Maximum	Sharpe	ratio	
Black–Litterman	
Markowitz	(1952)	
Robust	mean-variance	
Black	and	Litterman	(1992)	
Goldfarb	and	Iyengar	(2003)	
Resampled	efficient	frontier	
Mean–downside	risk	
Michaud	(1998)	
Sortino	and	van	der	Meer	(1991)	
C.	Risk-structured	
Global	minimum	variance	
Clarke,	de	Silva,	and	Thorley	(2006)	
Risk	parity	(Equal	risk	contribution)	Maillard,	Roncalli,	and	Teïletche	(2010)	
Hierarchical	risk	parity	
Maximum	diversification	
López	de	Prado	(2016)	
Choueifaty	and	Coignard	(2008)	
Minimum	correlation	
Varadi	et	al.	(2012)	
D.	Non-traditional	
CVaR	optimization	
Max	drawdown-constrained	
Rockafellar	and	Uryasev	(2000)	
Chekhlov,	Uryasev,	and	Zabarankin	(2005)	
Tail-risk	parity	
Total	Portfolio	Allocation	(TPA)	
two-factor	(equity	and	bonds)	
Spinu	(2013)	
Ang,	Brandt,	and	Denison	(2014)	
Adversarial	diversifier	
Researcher	
—	
—	
Exhibit 5: Portfolio Construction (PC) Agents	
The	non-traditional	category	also	contains	a	Researcher	agent	and	an	Adversarial	
Diversifier	agent.	Rather	than	implementing	a	fixed	optimization	objective,	the	PC-researcher	
agent	explores	the	literature	on	portfolio	construction	methods,	identifies	objectives	not	yet	
represented	in	the	pipeline,	and	proposes	a	novel	method	not	spanned	by	the	current	
registry	of	PC	methods.	In	the	March	2026	run,	the	PC-researcher	proposes	a	maximum	
entropy	portfolio	(Bera	and	Park	2008)	that	maximizes	the	Shannon	entropy	of	portfolio	
weights	subject	to	a	minimum	Sharpe	ratio	floor.	It	is	expected	that	successful	new	PC	
methods	will	be	added	to	the	registry	of	PC	agents,	and	a	portfolio	review	process	can	also	
cull	unsuccessful	PC	methods.		
The	PC-adversarial	diversifier	agent	operates	as	follows.	It	maximizes	tracking	variance	
relative	to	the	ensemble	centroid	(the	mean	of	all	other	PC	weights),	subject	to	a	Sharpe
ratio	floor	of	75%	of	the	maximum	Sharpe	portfolio.	Thus,	it	constructs	the	most	orthogonal	
12	
portfolio	to	the	first	20	PC	agents	(including	the	PC-researcher	agent)	subject	to	the	Sharpe	
ratio	floor.	The	adversarial	diversifier	is	not	intended	as	a	standalone	recommendation;	it	
surfaces	allocation	ideas	that	are	overlooked	by	conventional	methods	and	can	reduce	
pairwise	weight	overlaps	when	incorporated	into	the	meta-portfolio.	
3.5 Portfolio	Construction	(PC)	Strategy	Review	
The	PC	strategy	review	is	a	process	in	which	the	21	portfolio	construction	agents	critique	
and	rank	each	other’s	work,	similar	to	the	multi-agent	debate	and	voting	mechanisms	of	Du	
et	al.	(2023),	Chen	et	al.	(2025),	and	Chuang	et	al.	(2024)	but	in	a	setting	where	the	agents	
hold	diverse	priors	encoded	by	their	PC	category	(see	Exhibit	5).		
The	review	proceeds	in	stages,	summarized	in	Exhibit	6.	First,	a	Chief	Risk	Officer	(CRO)	
agent	produces	a	standardized	risk	report	for	each	candidate	portfolio,	which	covers	
standard	risk	metrics	like	ex-ante	and	back-test	volatility,	value-at-risk,	maximum	
drawdown,	concentration	metrics,	factor	tilts,	and	IPS	compliance.	The	CRO-agent	is	a	
neutral	assessor:	it	scores	risk	and	produces	commentary,	but	does	not	vote.		
Exhibit 6: Portfolio Construction (PC) Strategy Review	
13	
Each	PC	agent	reviews	exactly	two	peers—one	from	its	own	category	(intra-category	
review,	which	is	more	likely	to	identify	technical	errors	within	a	shared	framework)	and	one	
from	a	different	category	(inter-category	review,	which	can	challenge	foundational	
assumptions	from	a	contrasting	worldview).	Assignments	are	randomized	with	a	recorded	
seed,	producing	42	reviews	across	the	21	candidates.	All	reviews	are	released	
simultaneously	so	that	every	agent	can	read	every	review	before	voting.	
Voting	follows	a	modified	Borda	count.	Each	agent	submits	a	top-five	ranking	
(awarding	5,	4,	3,	2,	and	1	points)	and	a	bottom	flag	(−2	points),	excluding	itself.	This	
structure	surfaces	both	consensus	and	dissent	simultaneously:	a	method	that	receives	near
unanimous	top-five	placement	reflects	broad	agreement,	while	a	method	flagged	bottom
one	by	a	majority	signals	a	clear	rejection.	The	vote	totals	are	then	blended	with	a	
quantitative	metric	score	(a	weighted	composite	of	backtest	Sharpe,	IPS	compliance,	
diversification,	regime	fit,	estimation	risk,	and	CMA	utilization)	using	a	regime-dependent	
weight.	This	blending	ensures	that	the	final	ranking	reflects	both	collective	peer	judgment	
and	objective	performance	metrics.	A	diversity	constraint	requires	the	top-five	shortlist	to	
include	representation	from	at	least	three	of	the	four	families,	preventing	a	single	
philosophical	school	from	monopolizing	the	recommendation	set.	
Finally,	the	top	five	ranking	PC	agents	then	revise	their	proposals,	taking	into	account	
the	peer	reviews	and	the	CRO	report.	The	revisions	mostly	take	into	account	the	two	specific	
reviews,	but	since	the	agents	have	full	information,	they	can	revise	their	structured	output	
to	incorporate	comments	from	any	PC	agent.		
3.6 CIO	Agent	
The	CIO-agent	receives	the	strategy	review	output—the	21	candidate	portfolios,	their	peer	
reviews,	CRO	risk	reports,	vote	tallies,	and	metric	scores—and	constructs	the	final	
recommended	allocation	operating	as	a	LLM-as-judge.	In	addition	to	being	able	to	choose	a	
given	portfolio	method,	it	has	access	to	several	ensemble	techniques:	simple	average,	inverse	
tracking-error	weighting,	backtest-Sharpe	weighting,	meta-optimization	that	treats	PC	
portfolios	as	“assets”	in	a	second-level	optimization,	regime-conditional	weighting	(which		
14	
Exhibit 7: CIO Agent 
varies	method	weights	by	macro	regime),	composite-score	weighting,	and	a	trimmed	mean	
that	excludes	statistical	outliers.	The	CIO-agent	evaluates	each	ensemble	on	the	same	
diagnostic	suite	used	for	individual	portfolios—performance	statistics	and	checking	IPS	
compliance	(which	is	non-negotiable)—and	selects	the	ensemble	method	best	suited	to	the	
current	regime	with	a	written	rationale.		
A	crucial	role	of	the	CIO-agent	is	not	just	to	produce	weights—the	CIO-agent	explains	
why	the	portfolio	was	chosen,	what	assumptions	drive	it,	and	what	would	cause	the	portfolio	
to	no	longer	be	valid.	The	CIO	agent	also	produces	a	board	memo,	which	summarizes	the	
recommendation	in	a	governance	document	written	for	non-technical	stakeholders.	The	
memo	covers	the	recommended	allocation	and	its	expected	performance	relative	to	a	60/40	
equity-bond	benchmark,	the	macro	rationale,	the	largest	positions,	changes	since	the	last	
review,	key	risks	to	monitor	together	with	a	quarterly	rebalancing	plan	with	off-cycle	drift	
triggers,	and	an	IPS	compliance	statement.	The	board	memo	thus	closes	the	loop	between	
the	autonomous	agentic	pipeline	and	institutional	oversight:	the	agents	execute	every	
analytical	step,	but	the	output	is	a	document	that	a	board	of	trustees	or	investment	
15	
committee	can	read,	challenge,	and	approve—preserving	the	governance	framework	that	
Johnson	et	al.	(2017)	identify	as	essential	at	every	level	of	control	abstraction.	
4. Empirical	Results	
The	most	important	part	of	the	agentic	SAA	framework	is	the	Investment	Policy	Statement	
(IPS).	In	our	example,	the	IPS	has	three	layers.	The	first	layer	specifies	the	investment	
universe	of	18	liquid	asset	classes,	each	investable	through	exchange-traded	funds.	The	six	
equity	classes	are	US	Large	Cap,	US	Small	Cap,	US	Value,	US	Growth,	International	Developed,	
and	Emerging	Markets.	The	eight	fixed-income	classes	are	Short-Term	Treasuries,	
Intermediate	Treasuries,	Long-Term	Treasuries,	Investment-Grade	Corporates,	High-Yield	
Corporates,	International	Sovereign	Bonds,	International	Corporates,	and	USD	Emerging	
Market	Debt.	The	four	remaining	classes	are	REITs,	Gold,	Commodities,	and	Cash.	The	second	
layer	specifies	the	objective:	a	target	real	return	of	CPI	+3.0–4.0%,	an	expected	volatility	band	
of	8–12%,	and	a	maximum	drawdown	limit	of	−25%	peak-to-trough.	The	third	layer	is	the	
active	risk	budget:	the	portfolio's	ex-ante	tracking	error	relative	to	the	60/40	equity-bond	
benchmark	must	not	exceed	6%.		
We	illustrate	the	agentic	SAA	pipeline	using	a	run	in	March	2026.		
4.1 Macro	Regime	
The	macro	agent	classifies	the	current	environment	as	late-cycle	with	stagflationary	risk	at	
medium-high	confidence.	US	real	GDP	growth	has	decelerated	in	the	most	recent	revision,	
while	nonfarm	payrolls	turn	negative	in	February.	Inflation	is	moderating	toward	target	(CPI	
2.4%,	core	2.5%)	but	is	expected	to	re-accelerate	toward	3%	following	an	oil	supply	shock	
from	Iranian	conflict	that	is	pushing	up	the	price	of	Brent	crude.	The	macro	agent	estimates	
a	baseline	recession	probability	of	25–35%,	consistent	with	estimates	from	major	
forecasters.	This	regime	classification	propagates	to	all	downstream	agents.	
16	
	17	
Asset	Class	Hist.	ERP	Regime	
Adj.	
BL	Equil.	Inv.	
Gordon	
Impl.	
ERP	
Auto
Blend	
Judge	Δ	Judge	vs.		
Auto	Blend	
US	Large	Cap	12.5	9.8	9.3	4.3	4.0	7.9	6.8	−1.1	
US	Growth	13.3	10.0	9.7	3.5	3.2	8.2	6.2	−2.0	
US	Value	11.7	9.5	9.0	4.8	4.9	8.0	7.5	−0.5	
US	Small	Cap	12.1	9.8	10.2	4.1	5.6	8.2	8.2	0.0	
Intl	Developed	7.7	6.2	9.3	6.6	5.7	7.0	6.7	−0.3	
Emg.	Markets	10.9	9.2	10.4	5.3	6.9	8.4	8.2	−0.2	
REITs	12.1	11.2	8.7	7.1	3.4	8.5	8.3	−0.2	
	
Exhibit	8:	CMA	Method	Estimates	and	Judge	Selections	for	Equity	Asset	Classes		
(%,	nominal,	3-year	horizon)	
	
4.2 Asset	Class	(AC)	Agents	
We	concentrate	on	the	equity	AC	agents	to	illustrate	the	effect	of	LLM-as-judge.	Exhibit	8	
reports	the	method-level	CMA	estimates,	the	confidence-weighted	auto-blend,	and	the	CMA	
judge’s	final	selection	for	the	seven	equity	asset	classes.	Each	agent	defines	six	expected-	
return	methods	producing	candidate	estimates	that	span	a	wide	range.	The	judge	reads	all	
candidates	alongside	the	macro	regime,	asset-level	signals,	and	historical	statistics,	and	
constructs	a	custom	blend	with	explicit	weights	and	a	written	rationale.	
A	striking	feature	in	Exhibit	8	is	the	cross-sectional	pattern	of	the	LLM-as-judge’s	
adjustments.	All	the	judges	chose	custom	blends	rather	than	a	single	method,	but	the	
magnitude	of	adjustment	varies	systematically	with	valuation.	US	Growth—the	most	
expensive	asset	class	(CAPE	≈	31,	earnings	yield	3.2%	versus	a	3.7%	risk-free	rate)—
receives	the	largest	markdown	of	−2.0%	to	the	auto-blend,	as	the	judge	assigns	60%	weight	
to	valuation-based	methods	and	only	5%	to	the	historical	equity	risk	premium	(ERP).	US	
Large	Cap	(CAPE	≈	25)	is	marked	down	by	−1.1%.	At	the	other	end,	Emerging	Markets	(CAPE	
≈	13)	and	REITs	receive	adjustments	of	only	−0.2%,	while	US	Small	Cap	is	essentially	
unchanged.	The	judges	are	not	uniformly	bearish;	but	they	are	skeptical	of	backward-looking	
return	estimates	for	asset	classes	where	current	valuations	are	most	stretched.	
	
	
	18	
Rank	Method	Category	Vote	Metric	Composite	
1	Maximum	Diversification	C:	Risk-Structured	96	0.553	1.000	
2	Black-Litterman	B:	Return-Optimized	76	0.551	0.936	
3	Risk	Parity	C:	Risk-Structured	42	0.503	0.750	
4	Hierarchical	Risk	Parity	C:	Risk-Structured	41	0.497	0.737	
5	Tail	Risk	Parity	D:	Non-Traditional	22	0.510	0.702	
6	Total	Portfolio	Allocation	D:	Non-Traditional	22	0.479	0.648	
7	Resampled	Efficient	Frontier	B:	Return-Optimized	5	0.468	0.578	
8	Equal	Weight	A:	Heuristic	3	0.468	0.572	
9	Mean-Downside	Risk	(Sortino)	B:	Return-Optimized	1	0.459	0.549	
10	Maximum	Sharpe	Ratio	B:	Return-Optimized	4	0.438	0.522	
11	Maximum	Entropy	E:	PC-Researcher	3	0.406	0.464	
12	Inverse	Volatility	A:	Heuristic	0	0.407	0.457	
13	Robust	Mean-Variance	B:	Return-Optimized	0	0.406	0.456	
14	Inverse	Variance	A:	Heuristic	0	0.365	0.386	
15	Max	Drawdown	Constrained	D:	Non-Traditional	0	0.362	0.380	
16	Global	Minimum	Variance	C:	Risk-Structured	0	0.359	0.375	
17	Minimum	Correlation	C:	Risk-Structured	0	0.355	0.368	
18	Volatility	Targeting	A:	Heuristic	0	0.304	0.280	
19	Market-Cap	Weight	A:	Heuristic	0	0.253	0.191	
20	CVaR	Minimization	D:	Non-Traditional	-6	0.239	0.150	
21	Adversarial	Diversifier	D:	Non-Traditional	-36	0.205	0.000	
	
Exhibit	9:	Agent	Voting	on	PC	Methods	
	
4.3 	Portfolio	Construction	(PC)	Strategy	Review	
The	21	PC-agents—the	20	canonical	methods	listed	in	Exhibit	5	plus	the	max-entropy	
method	proposed	by	the	PC-researcher—each	referee	two	other	agents’	proposals	and	vote.	
The	voting	results	are	summarized	in	Exhibit	9.		
The	Borda-count	vote	produces	a	clear	hierarchy:	maximum	diversification	ranks	first,	
followed	by	Black–Litterman	and	risk	parity.	The	top	five	are	completed	by	risk	parity	
strategies:	regular	risk	parity	and	hierarchical	risk	parity.	At	the	bottom	are	the	CVaR	
optimization	and	the	adversarial	diversifier,	which	trigger	dissent	reports.	These	results	are	
consistent	with	a	late-cycle	regime	with	relatively	large	uncertainty	on	the	expected	returns;	
not	surprisingly	methods	that	rely	primarily	on	the	covariance	structure	and	not	the	CMAs	
(Categories	B	and	C)	are	preferred	by	the	agents.	
As	described	in	Section	3.4,	the	PC-researcher	agent	identifies	a	new	PC	technique	not	
currently	spanned	by	the	candidate	PC	agents—maximum	entropy.	The	maximum	entropy	
portfolio	delivers	an	expected	return	and	volatility	(Sharpe	ratio	of	0.41)—squarely	between	
the	return	optimized	and	risk	structured	categories.	In	the	strategy	review	vote,	the	max
entropy	finishes	11th,	a	middling	rank	that	reflects	its	novelty	rather	than	poor	quality.	Only	
the	adversarial	diversifier	votes	it	into	a	top-5,	while	most	other	agents	rank	it	lower	because	
they	lack	prior	experience	of	the	method.	Based	on	the	agents’	voting,	a	production	pipeline	
would	likely	add	this	method	to	the	roster	of	PC	agents	in	subsequent	runs.	
The	adversarial	diversifier	is	expected	to	be	rejected	by	its	peers	because	it	is,	by	
construction,	orthogonal—and	that	rejection	is	a	feature,	not	a	flaw.	In	the	strategy	review,	
18	agents	voted	it	at	the	bottom.	But	the	adversarial	diversifier	is	valuable	at	the	CIO	
ensemble	stage,	to	which	we	now	turn.			
4.4 CIO	Agent	
The	CIO	is	an	LLM-as-judge	agent	which	scores	each	of	the	21	PC	methods	on	six	
dimensions—backtest	Sharpe	(25%),	IPS	compliance	(15%),	diversification	(15%),	regime	
fit	(20%),	estimation	robustness	(15%),	and	CMA	utilization	(10%)—and	constructs	the	
final	portfolio	using	several	ensemble	combination	techniques.	In	the	March	2026	run,	the	
CIO	selects	the	inverse-tracking-error-weighted	ensemble,	which	assigns	higher	weight	to	
methods	whose	portfolios	are	closer	to	the	ensemble	centroid.	The	resulting	portfolio	has	an	
expected	return	of	6.87%,	volatility	of	7.54%,	a	Sharpe	ratio	of	0.43,	and	an	effective	number	
of	assets,	N,	(Meucci	2009)	of	11.2.	The	ex-ante	tracking	error	versus	a	60/40	benchmark	is	
2.41%.	
The	top	ensemble	weights	are	reported	in	Exhibit	10	and	are	the	market-cap	weight	
(11.1%),	volatility	targeting	(6.7%),	equal	weight	(6.0%),	inverse	variance	(6.0%),	and	max
entropy	(5.6%).	It	is	notable	that	the	max	entropy	method	is	“discovered”	by	the	PC
researcher	agent.	The	CIO	assigns	a	non-zero	weight	to	the	adversarial	diversifier	even		
19	
	20	
Method	Category	Ensemble	
Weight	Vote	
Rank	Composite	
Market-Cap	Weight	Heuristic	11.1%	19	0.191	
Volatility	Targeting	Heuristic	6.7%	18	0.280	
Equal	Weight	Heuristic	6.0%	8	0.572	
Inverse	Variance	Heuristic	6.0%	14	0.386	
Maximum	Entropy	PC-Researcher	5.6%	11	0.464	
Inverse	Volatility	Heuristic	5.6%	12	0.457	
Hierarchical	Risk	Parity	Risk-Structured	5.3%	4	0.737	
Tail	Risk	Parity	Non-Traditional	5.3%	5	0.702	
Risk	Parity	Risk-Structured	5.1%	3	0.750	
CVaR	Minimization	Non-Traditional	4.2%	20	0.150	
Robust	Mean-Variance	Return-Optimized	4.1%	13	0.456	
Resampled	Efficient	Frontier	Return-Optimized	4.1%	7	0.578	
Global	Minimum	Variance	Risk-Structured	4.0%	16	0.375	
Maximum	Sharpe	Ratio	Return-Optimized	4.0%	10	0.522	
Mean-Downside	Risk	(Sortino)	Return-Optimized	4.0%	9	0.549	
Max	Drawdown	Constrained	Non-Traditional	3.6%	15	0.380	
Minimum	Correlation	Risk-Structured	3.5%	17	0.368	
Black-Litterman	Return-Optimized	3.3%	2	0.936	
Maximum	Diversification	Risk-Structured	3.1%	1	1.000	
Adversarial	Diversifier	Non-Traditional	2.7%	21	0.000	
Total	Portfolio	Allocation	Non-Traditional	2.7%	6	0.648	
	
Exhibit	10:	Ensemble	Weights	Across	Portfolio	Construction	Methods	
	
	
though	its	standalone	metrics	(effective	N	of	2.4,	maximum	drawdown	-46.3%)	would	
disqualify	it	under	any	single-method	selection	rule,	because	the	scoring	gives	the	CIO	agent	
latitude	to	value	ensemble	diversification	alongside	standalone	quality.		
The	adversarial	diversifier	contributes	allocations	that	are,	by	construction,	orthogonal	
to	consensus.	This	reduces	pairwise	weight	overlaps	across	the	ensemble	inputs,	expanding	
the	effective	spanning	set	of	portfolios	available	to	the	CIO.	The	mechanism	is	analogous	to	
boosting	in	machine	learning	(Schapire	1990):	each	weak	learner	is	individually	suboptimal,	
but	the	ensemble	benefits	precisely	from	learners	that	make	forecasting	errors	in		
	
	21	
Asset	Class	Category	Weight	Risk	Contrib.	
Intl	Developed	Equity	15.9%	29.8%	
Intermediate	Treasuries	Fixed	Income	14.7%	2.9%	
US	Large	Cap	Equity	8.9%	15.3%	
Long-Term	Treasuries	Fixed	Income	8.4%	2.9%	
Cash	Cash	8.1%	0.1%	
Short-Term	Treasuries	Fixed	Income	7.3%	0.2%	
US	Value	Equity	7.2%	11.9%	
Emerging	Markets	Equity	4.9%	10.9%	
Intl	Sovereigns	Fixed	Income	4.8%	0.7%	
US	Growth	Equity	4.4%	8.2%	
US	Small	Cap	Equity	3.6%	7.2%	
IG	Corporates	Fixed	Income	2.4%	1.2%	
Gold	Real	Assets	2.1%	1.1%	
HY	Corporates	Fixed	Income	1.6%	1.3%	
Commodities	Real	Assets	1.6%	1.3%	
REITs	Real	Assets	1.4%	2.3%	
Intl	Corporates	Fixed	Income	1.3%	1.3%	
USD	EM	Debt	Fixed	Income	1.2%	1.2%	
	
Exhibit	11:	Final	Portfolio	Weights	
	
uncorrelated	dimensions.	Thus,	the	adversarial	diversifier	provides	the	CIO	with	exposure	
to	regions	of	the	allocation	space	that	no	PC	agent	peer-approved	method	would	have	
discovered.	
The	final	allocation	is	reported	in	Exhibit	11.	Relative	to	a	60/40	benchmark,	the	target	
portfolio	is	modestly	underweight	equity	(44.9%	versus	60%),	roughly	in	line	on	fixed	
income	(41.7%	versus	40%),	and	carries	an	8.1%	cash	position	alongside	a	5.1%	real-assets	
sleeve.	Within	equity,	the	allocation	exhibits	an	international	tilt	and	within	fixed	income,	
the	portfolio	concentrates	in	duration	with	Intermediate	and	Long-Term	Treasuries	together	
account	for	23.1%	of	total	weight.	Credit-spread	sectors	(High	Yield,	IG	Corporates,	EM	Debt,	
and	International	Corporates)	are	held	in	modest	satellite	positions	totaling	6.5%.	The	
portfolio	backtests	with	a	Sharpe	ratio	of	0.39	over	1996-2026,	compared	with	0.41	for	a	
60/40	benchmark,	but	with	a	substantially	smaller	maximum	drawdown	(-25.6%	versus		-34.3%).	
5. Discussion	
5.1 Risks	
There	are	several	risks	in	our	agentic	SAA	framework.		
A	cornerstone	of	quantitative	investments	is	backtests—using	LLMs,	unfortunately,	
introduces	information	leakage,	or	lookahead	bias.	Yin	et	al.	(2024)	document	that	LLMs	
trained	on	internet-scale	corpora	inevitably	encode	historical	financial	data,	making	clean	
out-of-sample	backtests	impossible.	The	only	correct	solution	is	to	use	LLMs	that	have	been	
trained	only	up	to	a	point	in	time	(Yan	et	al.,	2026),	but	this	approach	is	extremely	
computationally	onerous.	Absent	having	point-in-time	LLMs,	lookahead	bias	is	unavoidable.	
This	critique,	however,	does	not	apply	to	agent	models	in	live	production	environments.		
LLM	monoculture	is	perhaps	a	more	subtle	risk.	If	all	21	PC-agents	and	the	CIO	share	
the	same	base	language	model,	their	errors	may	be	correlated	in	unanticipated	ways.	The	
peer-review	protocol	partially	mitigates	this	because	the	agents	have	different	optimization	
objectives	with	full	information	but	our	example	used	the	same	LLM.	An	alternative	
approach	is	to	use	multiple	foundation	models,	or	mix	LLM	agents	with	purely	deterministic	
optimizers.		
A	new	risk	compared	to	traditional	human-centered	SAA	workflows	is	automation	
surprise—a	phenomenon	described	by	Parasuraman,	Sheridan,	and	Wickens	(2000)	in	
which	operators	lose	situational	awareness	when	monitoring	an	automated	system.	An	
investment	committee	that	rubber-stamps	the	board	memo	without	scrutinizing	the	CIO’s	
reasoning	risks	the	same	mode	failures	that	occur	in	aviation	and	industrial	automation.	The	
board	memo	is	designed	to	be	readable	and	to	flag	key	assumptions,	but	institutional	
processes	must	ensure	genuine	human	engagement	rather	than	perfunctory	oversight.	
Further,	the	CIO-agent’s	reasoning,	the	CRO-agent’s	risk	report,	and	the	documented	natural	
language	audit	trail	produced	by	all	agents	can	satisfy	fiduciary	documentation	
requirements.		
There	are	further	risks	in	the	agent	interaction	protocols.	Although	the	agentic	SAA	
pipeline	runs	on	an	internal	system	(unlike	OpenClaw,	Steinberger	et	al.	2026),	any	
architecture	where	agents	can	invoke	tools	and	modify	files—especially	for	the	self-learning	
meta-agent—introduces	structural	security	risk.	Techniques	like	sandboxing,	privilege	
22	
separation	for	the	agents,	and	other	agents	acting	as	auditors	can	mitigate	these	risks	(Ying	
et	al.	2026;	Li,	Li,	and	Li	2026).		
5.2 Moving	Up	the	Abstraction	Ladder	
What	is	the	role	of	the	human	in	the	agentic	SAA	process?		
In	the	Johnson	et	al.	(2017)	framework	of	increasing	human	abstraction,	a	purely	
agentic	SAA	process	would	have	the	human	writing	the	IPS	(or	at	least	the	human	is	
responsible	for	the	IPS)—specifying	the	asset	universe,	risk	budget,	category	bounds,	and	
escalation	triggers,	and	the	agents	execute	every	subsequent	step.	Every	agent	in	the	pipeline	
reads	the	IPS	and	is	constrained	by	it;	the	CRO-agent	explicitly	checks	IPS	compliance	for	
every	candidate	portfolio;	the	CIO-agent	is	instructed	to	comply	with	the	IPS.	The	IPS	is	
already	a	legal	and	regulatory	requirement	for	institutional	investors,	and	repurposing	it	as	
the	governing	document	for	an	agentic	pipeline	requires	no	new	governance	infrastructure;	
the	same	document	that	constrains	human	portfolio	managers	can	also	constrain	
autonomous	agents.	
A	key	feature	is	that	the	same	agentic	SAA	workflow	can	operate	at	different	autonomy	
levels	(Azimbayev	et	al.	2025)	by	adjusting	the	IPS.	Tightening	the	tracking-error	bound	or	
adding	hard	asset	class	floors	moves	the	system	toward	supervisory	control;	relaxing	
bounds	or	removing	floors	moves	it	toward	full	goal-oriented	autonomy.	The	abstraction	
level	is	a	policy	choice,	not	an	architectural	constraint.	
5.3 Autonomous	Self-Learning	Agents	
Our	SAA	agents	already	possess	the	ability	to	propose	new	portfolio	construction	methods	
(the	PC-researcher	agent),	and	assess	and	vote	on	each	other’s	work	(in	the	PC	Strategy	
Review,	see	Section	3.5).	The	agents	interact	with	each	other	and	revise	their	proposals	from	
other	agent’s	referee	reports	and	the	CRO’s	report.	The	agents	also	interpret	information	on	
their	own	(LLM-as-judge).	It	is	possible	to	extend	this	further	so	that	agents	themselves	
learn.		
23	
The	SAA	process	is	not	static—the	portfolio	must	be	rebalanced	regularly,	the	
assumptions	underpinning	the	current	target	portfolio	evaluated	(summarized	in	the	last	
CIO	agent’s	board	memo),	and	the	agents’	forecasts	evaluated.	The	last	includes	both	the	
CMAs	of	the	AC-agents	and	the	portfolio	methodologies	of	the	PC-agents.		
As	part	of	the	ongoing	portfolio	review	and	implementation	process,	we	introduce	a	
meta-agent	that	executes	a	self-improvement	cycle	after	each	rebalancing	period.	First,	it	
computes	feedback	by	comparing	the	macro	agent’s	and	all	AC-agents’	past	estimates,	signal	
directions,	and	regime	classifications	against	realized	returns	over	a	rolling	three-year	
window—measuring	regime	accuracy,	cross-sectional	rank	correlation	of	expected	returns,	
signal	hit	rates,	and	per-method	prediction	error	by	asset	class	and	regime.	The	meta-agent	
analyzes	these	feedback	records	to	identify	systematic	weaknesses	and	researches	potential	
improvements	through	backtesting	and	statistical	analysis.	Then,	it	decides	which	
improvements	to	implement	and	auto-modifies	the	relevant	files:	skill	and	agent	prompt	
descriptions	and	Python	code.	All	changes	are	logged	in	a	structured	record	that	preserves	
the	evidence	base,	the	reasoning,	and	the	exact	modifications. 
This	loop	is	qualitatively	different	from	conventional	parameter	re-estimation.	The	
meta-agent	reads	its	own	past	performance,	reasons	about	why	predictions	failed,	and	
modifies	both	computational	code	and	natural-language	instructions.	For	example,	a	regime
adjusted	ERP	method	that	systematically	overestimates	in	late-cycle	environments	might	
have	its	confidence	scoring	down-weighted,	while	the	CMA	judge	skill	might	be	updated	to	
apply	a	larger	valuation	tilt	when	CAPE	exceeds	a	threshold—changes	that	involve	both	
quantitative	recalibration	and	qualitative	judgment.	The	human's	role	shifts	from	manually	
tuning	parameters	to	reviewing	the	meta-agent's	change	log	and	setting	the	constraints	that	
govern	the	self-improvement	process—in	the	Johnson	et	al.	(2017)	framework,	supervisory	
control	of	the	learning	process	itself.	
Of	course,	because	of	the	long	horizons	required	for	SAA	evaluations,	it	will	take	some	
time	before	we	can	evaluate	whether	the	meta-agent's	modifications	genuinely	improve	out
of-sample	performance.		
24	
5.4 More	Agents	
Our	agentic	SAA	pipeline	assigns	one	agent	to	a	functional	role—a	single	macro	agent,	a	
single	CRO,	one	agent	per	asset	class—but	it	is	possible	to	also	introduce	multiple	agents.	
This	is	already	done	by	the	CIO-agent	that	aggregates	and	makes	decisions	over	the	output	
of	multiple	PC-agents.	Any	node	in	the	pipeline	can	be	decomposed	into	a	team	of	sub-agents	
coordinated	by	a	supervisor.	For	example,	the	macro-agent	could	be	replaced	by	a	Chief	
Economist-agent	that	delegates	to	specialists—a	Fed	watcher-agent,	a	fiscal	policy-agent,	a	
global	macro-agent,	domestic	politics-agent,	geopolitical	risk-agent,	dedicated	FX	and	
commodities	agents,	etc.—and	then	the	Chief	Economist-agent	can	aggregate	its	views	
through	similar	deliberation	protocols	used	in	the	PC	strategy	review.	Similarly,	the	CRO
agent	currently	produces	a	single	risk	report	per	candidate	portfolio;	it	could	instead	
orchestrate	sub-agents	for	liquidity	risk,	implementation	risk,	short-horizon	versus	long
horizon	volatility	(each	using	different	covariance	estimators	produced	by	yet	further	
agents),	coordinate	expected	shortfall	and	CVaR	decomposition	agents,	and	multiple	factor
based	stress	testing	agents,	etc.	 
The	guiding	principle	for	when	to	decompose	a	single	agent	into	a	team	is	the	same	one	
that	governs	organizational	design	in	human	institutions:	decompose	when	the	task	requires	
genuinely	distinct	expertise	that	benefits	from	independent	reasoning	before	aggregation.	A	
single	macro	agent	can	synthesize	a	regime	call	when	the	relevant	signals	are	few	and	their	
interactions	are	well	understood;	but	when	the	fiscal	outlook,	monetary	stance,	and	
geopolitical	environment	point	in	conflicting	directions—as	they	do	in	a	late-cycle	regime	
with	simultaneous	monetary	easing	and	fiscal	expansion—independent	specialist	agents	are	
more	likely	to	surface	the	tension	than	a	single	agent	asked	to	weigh	everything	at	once	(Du	
et	al.	2023).	Multiple	agents	are	especially	valuable	where	informed	disagreement	is	
productive,	not	where	the	computation	burden	is	merely	large.	
6. Conclusion	
We	describe	an	agentic	architecture	for	strategic	asset	allocation	(SAA)	that	coordinates	
approximately	50	specialized	agents	through	macro	analysis,	capital	market	assumptions,	
25	
portfolio	construction,	interactions	of	agents,	and	CIO	analysis.	The	architecture	embeds	
multi-agent	deliberation—peer	review,	voting,	and	an	adversarial	diversifier—into	the	
portfolio	construction	process,	and	introduces	a	meta-agent	that	closes	the	feedback	loop	
between	prediction	and	forecasts	so	that	agents	can	learn.	The	Investment	Policy	Statement	
(IPS)	serves	as	the	operational	boundary,	analogous	to	the	operational	design	domain	in	
autonomous	driving,	ensuring	that	agents	operate	within	institutionally	defined	constraints.		
There	are	many	open	questions.	Whether	agentic	SAA	results	in	better	performance	
than	traditional	human-centered	SAA	can	only	be	answered	by	live	performance.	How	will	
regulatory	frameworks	adapt	to	investment	processes	in	which	the	analytical	workload	is	
executed	by	autonomous	agents	governed	by	an	IPS	rather	than	by	human	analysts	governed	
by	organizational	and	regulatory	hierarchy?	What	is	clear	is	that	agents	shift	the	bottleneck	
in	institutional	investing	from	human	bandwidth	to	human	judgment—a	shift	that	elevates	
rather	than	diminishes	the	role	of	the	investment	professional.	
26	
Bibliography	
Ang,	Andrew,	Michael	W.	Brandt,	and	David	F.	Denison.	2014.	“Review	of	the	Active	
Management	of	the	Norwegian	Government	Pension	Fund	Global.”	Report	to	the	
Norwegian	Ministry	of	Finance.		
Azimbayev,	Nazym,	Andrey	Kim,	Zhassulan	Ospanov,	and	Andrew	Ang.	2025.	“Investing	in	
AI	for	Investing:	Lessons	from	Autonomous	Driving	for	Investment	Firms.”	Working	
paper.	
Bates,	John	M.,	and	Clive	W.	J.	Granger.	1969.	“The	Combination	of	Forecasts.”	Operational	
Research	Quarterly	20	(4):	451–468.	
Bera,	Anil	K.,	and	Sung	Y.	Park.	2008.	“Optimal	Portfolio	Diversification	Using	the	Maximum	
Entropy	Principle.”	Econometric	Reviews	27	(4–6):	484–512.	
Black,	Fischer,	and	Robert	Litterman.	1992.	“Global	Portfolio	Optimization.”	Financial	
Analysts	Journal	48	(5):	28–43.	
Campbell,	John	Y.,	and	Robert	J.	Shiller.	1998.	“Valuation	Ratios	and	the	Long-Run	Stock	
Market	Outlook.”	Journal	of	Portfolio	Management	24	(2):	11–26.	
Clarke,	Roger	G.,	Harindra	de	Silva,	and	Steven	Thorley.	2006.	“Minimum-Variance	
Portfolios	in	the	U.S.	Equity	Market.”	Journal	of	Portfolio	Management	33	(1):	10-24.		
Clemen,	Robert	T.	1989.	“Combining	Forecasts:	A	Review	and	Annotated	Bibliography.”	
International	Journal	of	Forecasting	5	(4):	559–583.	
Chekhlov,	Alexei,	Stanislav	Uryasev,	and	Michael	Zabarankin.	2005.	“Drawdown	Measure	in	
Portfolio	Optimization.”	International	Journal	of	Theoretical	and	Applied	Finance	8	
(1):	13–58.	
Chen,	Shuang,	Zhiwei	Shi,	Zhongyun	Wang,	Yanshuang	Ao,	and	Michael	Luck.	2025.	“Should	
We	Debate	or	Vote?	Optimizing	Collective	Intelligence	in	Multi-Agent	Systems.”	
arXiv	preprint	arXiv:2501.07753.	
Choueifaty,	Yves,	and	Yves	Coignard.	2008.	“Toward	Maximum	Diversification.”	Journal	of	
Portfolio	Management	35	(1):	40–51.	
Chuang,	Yun-Shiuan,	Siddharth	Suresh,	Timothy	T.	Rogers,	and	Timothy	Hospedales.	2024.	
“Wisdom	of	the	Silicon	Crowd:	LLM	Ensemble	Prediction	Capabilities	Rival	Human	
Crowd	Accuracy.”	arXiv	preprint	arXiv:2402.19379.	
27	
DeMiguel,	Victor,	Lorenzo	Garlappi,	and	Raman	Uppal.	2009.	“Optimal	Versus	Naive	
Diversification:	How	Inefficient	Is	the	1/N	Portfolio	Strategy?”	Review	of	Financial	
Studies	22	(5):	1915–1953.	
Du,	Yilun,	Shuang	Li,	Antonio	Torralba,	Joshua	B.	Tenenbaum,	and	Igor	Mordatch.	2023.	
“Improving	Factuality	and	Reasoning	in	Language	Models	through	Multiagent	
Debate.”	arXiv	preprint	arXiv:2305.14325.	
Feng,	K.	J.	Kevin,	David	W.	McDonald,	and	Amy	X.	Zhang.	2025.	“Levels	of	Autonomy	for	AI	
Agents.”	arXiv	preprint	arXiv:2506.12469.	
Gilmore,	Stephen,	and	Joseph	Simonian.	2025.	“Total	Portfolio	Approach.”	Journal	of	
Portfolio	Management	51	(8):	109–126.	
Goldfarb,	Donald,	and	Garud	Iyengar.	2003.	“Robust	Portfolio	Selection	Problems.”	
Mathematics	of	Operations	Research	28	(1):	1–38.	
Gordon,	Myron	J.	1959.	“Dividends,	Earnings,	and	Stock	Prices.”	Review	of	Economics	and	
Statistics	41	(2):	99–105.	
Grinold,	Richard	C.,	and	Kenneth	F.	Kroner.	2002.	“The	Equity	Risk	Premium.”	Investment	
Insights	5	(3):	7–33.	
Guo,	Taicheng,	Xiuying	Chen,	Yaqi	Wang,	Ruidi	Chang,	Shichao	Pei,	Nitesh	V.	Chawla,	Olaf	
Wiest,	and	Xiangliang	Zhang.	2025.	“Large	Language	Model	Based	Multi-Agents:	A	
Survey	of	Progress	and	Challenges.”	arXiv	preprint	arXiv:2402.01680.	
Hong,	Sirui,	Mingchen	Zhuge,	Jonathan	Chen,	Xiawu	Zheng,	Yuheng	Cheng,	Ceyao	Zhang,	
Jinlin	Wang,	et	al.	2023.	“MetaGPT:	Meta	Programming	for	a	Multi-Agent	
Collaborative	Framework.”	arXiv	preprint	arXiv:2308.00352.	
Huang,	Jian,	Junhua	Zhong,	Haiyan	Zhao,	and	Zhi	Jin.	2024a.	“Understanding	the	Planning	of	
LLM	Agents:	A	Survey.”	arXiv	preprint	arXiv:2402.02716.	
Huang,	Qingxiu,	Shudong	Liu,	Rui	Zhao,	and	Wei	Xu.	2024b.	“How	Do	LLM-Based	Agents	
Vote?”	arXiv	preprint	arXiv:2402.01766.	
Johnson,	Clifford	D.,	Michael	E.	Miller,	Christina	F.	Rusnock,	and	David	R.	Jacques.	2017.	“A	
Framework	for	Understanding	Automation	in	Terms	of	Levels	of	Human	Control	
Abstraction.”	In	2017	IEEE	International	Conference	on	Systems,	Man,	and	Cybernetics	
(SMC),	1145–1150.	IEEE.	
Kirby,	Chris,	and	Barbara	Ostdiek.	2012.	“It’s	All	in	the	Timing:	Simple	Active	Portfolio	
Strategies	That	Outperform	Naïve	Diversification.”	Journal	of	Financial	and	
Quantitative	Analysis	47	(2):	437–467.	
28	
Li,	Guohao,	Hasan	Abed	Al	Kader	Hammoud,	Hani	Itani,	Dmitrii	Khizbullin,	and	Bernard	
Ghanem.	2023.	“CAMEL:	Communicative	Agents	for	‘Mind’	Exploration	of	Large	
Language	Model	Society.”	In	Proceedings	of	NeurIPS	2023.	
Li,	Yaowei,	Jiawei	Guo,	Bo	Yang,	and	Yong	Tang.	2025.	“A	Survey	on	LLM-Based	Multi-Agent	
Collaboration.”	arXiv	preprint	arXiv:2501.08899.	
Li,	Zongwei,	Wenkai	Li,	and	Xiaoqi	Li.	2026.	“Defensible	Design	for	OpenClaw:	Securing	
Autonomous	Tool-Invoking	Agents.”	arXiv	preprint	arXiv:2603.13151.		
López	de	Prado,	Marcos.	2016.	“Building	Diversified	Portfolios	That	Outperform	Out	of	
Sample.”	Journal	of	Portfolio	Management	42	(4):	59–69.	
Markowitz,	Harry.	1952.	“Portfolio	Selection.”	Journal	of	Finance	7	(1):	77–91.	
Maillard,	Sébastien,	Thierry	Roncalli,	and	Jérôme	Teïletche.	2010.	“The	Properties	of	
Equally	Weighted	Risk	Contribution	Portfolios.”	Journal	of	Portfolio	Management	36	
(4):	60–70.	
Masterman,	Tula,	Sandi	Besen,	Mason	Sawtell,	and	Alex	Chao.	2024.	“The	Landscape	of	
Emerging	AI	Agent	Architectures	for	Reasoning,	Planning,	and	Tool	Calling:	A	
Survey.”	arXiv	preprint	arXiv:2404.11584.	
Merton,	Robert	C.	1980.	“On	Estimating	the	Expected	Return	on	the	Market:	An	Exploratory	
Investigation.”	Journal	of	Financial	Economics	8	(4):	323–361.	
Meucci,	Attilio.	2009,	“Managing	Diversification.”	Risk	22	(5):	74-79.		
Michaud,	Richard	O.	1998.	Efficient	Asset	Management:	A	Practical	Guide	to	Stock	Portfolio	
Optimization	and	Asset	Allocation.	Oxford:	Oxford	University	Press.	
Moreira,	Alan,	and	Tyler	Muir.	2017.	“Volatility-Managed	Portfolios.”	Journal	of	Finance	72	
(4):	1611–1644.	
Parasuraman,	Raja,	Thomas	B.	Sheridan,	and	Christopher	D.	Wickens.	2000.	“A	Model	for	
Types	and	Levels	of	Human	Interaction	with	Automation.”	IEEE	Transactions	on	
Systems,	Man,	and	Cybernetics—Part	A:	Systems	and	Humans	30	(3):	286–297.	
Rockafellar,	R.	Tyrrell,	and	Stanislav	Uryasev.	2000.	“Optimization	of	Conditional	Value-at
Risk.”	Journal	of	Risk	2	(3):	21–41.	
Schapire,	Robert	E.	1990.	“The	Strength	of	Weak	Learnability.”	Machine	Learning	5	(2):	
197–227.	
Sharpe,	William	F.	1964.	“Capital	Asset	Prices:	A	Theory	of	Market	Equilibrium	Under	
Conditions	of	Risk.”	Journal	of	Finance	19	(3):	425–442.	
29	
Sims,	Christopher	A.	2003.	“Implications	of	Rational	Inattention.”	Journal	of	Monetary	
Economics	50	(3):	665–690.	
Sortino,	Frank	A.,	and	Robert	van	der	Meer.	1991.	“Downside	Risk.”	Journal	of	Portfolio	
Management	17	(4):	27–31.	
Spinu,	Florin.	2013.	An	Algorithm	for	Computing	Risk	Parity	Weights.	Working	paper.		
Steinberger,	Peter,	et	al.	2026.	"OpenClaw."	Open-source	software,	GitHub.	
https://github.com/openclaw/openclaw	
Varadi,	David,	Michael	Kepler,	Henry	Bee,	and	Corey	Rittenhouse.	2012.	“The	Minimum	
Correlation	Algorithm:	A	Practical	Diversification	Tool.”	Working	paper.			
Wang,	Lei,	Chen	Ma,	Xueyang	Feng,	Zeyu	Zhang,	Hao	Yang,	Jingsen	Zhang,	Zhiyuan	Chen,	et	
al.	2024.	“A	Survey	on	Large	Language	Model	Based	Autonomous	Agents.”	Frontiers	
of	Computer	Science	18	(6):	186345.	
Wu,	Qingyun,	Gagan	Bansal,	Jieyu	Zhang,	Yiran	Wu,	Beibin	Li,	Erkang	Zhu,	Li	Jiang,	et	al.	
2023.	“AutoGen:	Enabling	Next-Gen	LLM	Applications	via	Multi-Agent	
Conversation.”	arXiv	preprint	arXiv:2308.08155.	
Xiao,	Yijia,	Mahdi	Soltanolkotabi,	and	Robin	Jia.	2024.	“TradingAgents:	Multi-Agents	LLM	
Financial	Trading	Framework.”	arXiv	preprint	arXiv:2412.20138.	
Xing,	Tianyu,	Zhijun	Lin,	Yiqi	Deng,	Jinghua	Yao,	Zhiming	Liu,	and	Hongyang	Yang.	2024.	
“FinRobot:	AI	Agent	for	Equity	Research	and	Valuation	with	Large	Language	
Models.”	arXiv	preprint	arXiv:2411.08804.	
Yan,	Y.,	Tang,	R.,	Gao,	Z.,	Jiang,	W.,	and	Lu,	Y.	2026.	“DatedGPT:	Preventing	Lookahead	Bias	
in	Large	Language	Models	with	Time-Aware	Pretraining.”	arXiv	preprint	
arXiv:2603.11838.		
Yao,	Shunyu,	Jeffrey	Zhao,	Dian	Yu,	Nan	Du,	Izhak	Shafran,	Karthik	Narasimhan,	and	Yuan	
Cao.	2023.	“ReAct:	Synergizing	Reasoning	and	Acting	in	Language	Models.”	In	
Proceedings	of	the	International	Conference	on	Learning	Representations	(ICLR).	
Yin,	Yifan,	Yanqiao	Zhu,	Yingxia	Shao,	and	Sihang	Li.	2024.	“A	Survey	on	Data	
Contamination	for	Large	Language	Models.”	arXiv	preprint	arXiv:2406.07995.	
Ying,	Zonghao,	Xiao	Yang,	Siyang	Wu,	Yumeng	Song,	Yang	Qu,	Hainan	Li,	Tianlin	Li,	Jiakai	
Wang,	Aishan	Liu,	and	Xianglong	Liu.	2026.	“Uncovering	Security	Threats	and	
Architecting	Defenses	in	Autonomous	Agents:	A	Case	Study	of	OpenClaw.”	arXiv	
preprint	arXiv:2603.12644.	
30	
Yu,	Hao,	Zheng	Yang,	and	Zhenwei	Wang.	2024.	“FinCon:	A	Synthesized	LLM	Multi-Agent	
System	with	Conceptual	Verbal	Reinforcement	for	Enhanced	Financial	Decision	
Making.”	In	Proceedings	of	NeurIPS	2024.	
Zhang,	Endong,	Yuezhang	Li,	and	Kai	Zhong.	2024.	“FinAgent:	A	Multimodal	Foundation	
Agent	for	Financial	Trading:	Tool-Augmented,	Diversified,	and	Generalist.”	arXiv	
preprint	arXiv:2402.18485.	
Zheng,	Lianmin,	Wei-Lin	Chiang,	Ying	Sheng,	Siyuan	Zhuang,	Zhanghao	Wu,	Yonghao	
Zhuang,	Zi	Lin,	et	al.	2023.	“Judging	LLM-as-a-Judge	with	MT-Bench	and	Chatbot	
Arena.”	In	Advances	in	Neural	Information	Processing	Systems	36	(NeurIPS	2023).		
Zhao,	Yinqi,	Huanting	Guo,	Zhenzhou	Lin,	Yifan	Yu,	Rui	Zhang,	and	Shuai	Zhang.	2025.	
“AlphaAgents:	An	End-to-End	Agent-Based	Automated	Quantitative	Investment	
Framework.”	arXiv	preprint	arXiv:2502.14476.












__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________




Governing Agentic AI in FinTech
Henry Han
Data Science and Artificial Intelligence Innovation Laboratory
Baylor University, USA
Henry_Han@Baylor.edu
August 2026
Abstract
arXiv:2608.11344v2  [cs.CY]  13 Aug 2026
Financial institutions are beginning to delegate consequential decisions to agentic AI systems
that decompose goals, coordinate models and tools, and act with little human oversight. How
ever, agentic AI governance in FinTech remains under-investigated. We argue that the binding
governance constraint on this shift is not capability but verifiability. We define the Verifiability
Gap as the positive shortfall between the verification demanded by delegated authority and the
explainability and reproducibility retained after a specific decision. The construct asks whether
the system preserves evidence sufficient for a named verifier, evidentiary standard, and audit
lag. We develop an agentic AI multilevel governance theory and examine its mechanisms in
three studies over nine model versions, ranging from a three-billion-parameter local model to
a commercial frontier system. Study 1 shows that provider releases alter historical financial
actions, and that the controls replay requires belong to the provider, not the firm: the current
frontier model rejects temperature, top_p, and top_k outright and never exposes a random
seed. Under the tightest controls each endpoint allows, a local model reproduced 320 of 320
executions, while hosted models reproduced 319 of 320 and 959 of 960. Study 2 shows that or
chestration is a latent policy layer. Architecture changes final actions, and no execution record
repeated in any configuration at any model scale. The frontier model reproduces its own actions
more often than the local ones, but its execution record is no better, and it loses a comparable
share of its verdict differentiation. Capability buys a higher starting point, not auditability.
Study 3 shows two deterministic credit-model versions that each reproduce their current action
perfectly, while the current one cannot recover a historical one. We conceptualize reproducibility
as a governance profile rather than a scalar, yielding evidence-contingent delegation: authority is
defensible only while retained evidence can substantiate its exercise. Beyond financial services,
this framework extends to other high-stakes domains of agentic AI governance where rigorous
auditability is required.
Keywords: Agentic AI governance; Verifiability Gap; delegated authority; reproducibility;
explainability; FinTech.
1. Introduction
A bank that declines a loan has to be able to say why. If the applicant complains, a regulator asks,
or a court becomes involved, someone must produce the reasons. If pressed, the bank must also
show that the same file would be decided the same way again. That obligation is old, it is written
into law, and until recently it was met by pointing at a person or at a model that could be re-run.
The systems now taking those decisions may do neither reliably. Software built on a large
language model (LLM), a system trained to continue text and thereby to answer, now interprets a
1
goal, breaks it into steps, calls other systems, and acts with little human intervention. It has moved
from pilots into production in finance. In agentic AI, the language model supplies the reasoning
and language core, while tools, memory, and orchestration mechanisms enable the system to take
action. These systems allocate capital, adjudicate credit, and negotiate settlements at institutional
scale. Whether they can do the work is no longer the interesting question.
The interesting question is what happens afterwards. An agent may have denied a loan or filled
an order. Can a supervisor, an auditor, or a court then establish why it acted? Can that verifier
also establish whether the agent would act the same way again? Both answers are needed, and this
paper argues that neither is currently guaranteed.
Agentic AI governance presents a new challenge that remains underexamined in IS and FinTech
research. How can organizations ensure that an agent’s decisions are reproducible and robust? How
can they ground those decisions in an auditable reasoning process? This is not the familiar “black
box” complaint in new packaging. The black-box problem concerns opacity, and its conventional
remedy is empirical validation. If a model cannot be explained, it can at least be tested: run it
repeatedly, vary the inputs, and characterize its behavior. Financial institutions have validated
opaque models in this way for decades, and existing supervisory practices largely assume that such
testing remains possible. What is new is that this empirical remedy may no longer work. Several
factors may change the result of a repeated agentic decision. The underlying model may change on
the vendor’s schedule, while the tools may return different information. Previously available execu
tion controls may also be modified or withdrawn. The governance problem is therefore not opacity
alone. It is the loss of reproducibility as the principal safeguard against opacity. Agentic systems
can be both difficult to explain and difficult to reproduce. This conjunction and its consequences
for organizational control and accountability is the central problem examined in this paper.
LLM-based and agentic AI systems are becoming central to the architecture and operation of
contemporary information systems. Prior IS research has established important foundations for
understanding AI management, delegation to agentic artifacts, explainability, and human oversight
[Baird and Maruping, 2021, Berente et al., 2021, Fügener et al., 2021]. A longer tradition in
organization and IS research examines how firms retain control over work they do not directly
perform, developing formal and informal control modes and showing how control portfolios are
configured and rebalanced over time [Ouchi, 1980, Kirsch, 1997, Cardinal et al., 2004, Wiener et al.,
2016]. More recent work extends these questions to algorithmic and learning systems that participate
in the work itself [Faraj et al., 2018, Kellogg et al., 2020, Murray et al., 2021, Teodorescu et al.,
2021]. Yet this literature has only begun to theorize the distinctive governance problems posed
by LLM-based agentic systems. These systems interpret goals, coordinate tools and memory, and
take consequential actions with limited human intervention. We argue that much of this literature
presupposes a sufficiently stable technological object that can be inspected, tested, and rerun.
Agentic AI weakens this assumption because the operative decision system is distributed across
models, tools, memory, orchestration mechanisms, and provider-controlled infrastructure that may
change after deployment [Bommasani et al., 2021]. We therefore shift the unit of analysis from
model transparency to system verifiability. We ask when delegated agentic authority exceeds an
organization’s capacity to explain and reproduce the resulting actions.
The consequences of weak governance for agentic AI are immediate. A reviewer who cannot
follow the reasoning, question its assumptions, or reproduce the decision is not exercising meaningful
oversight. The sign-off becomes a formality, and the firm assumes a liability where it believed it had
established a control. An agentic decision may still be challenged after the fact. Yet if it cannot be
reconstructed, corrected, or reversed within the operating system, that challenge has little practical
force. Repeated failures of this kind can ultimately erode trust in the entire agentic system. The
stakes are especially high in finance. Agentic AI increasingly supports capital allocation and credit
2
decisions, where a single action can carry both a monetary cost and a legal consequence [Gu et al.,
2020, Fuster et al., 2022]. Machine-learning methods are already established in consumer credit
and FinTech lending, where their distributional and regulatory consequences are actively debated
[Khandani et al., 2010, Berg et al., 2020, Goldstein et al., 2019, Bartlett et al., 2022]. In this setting,
explainability, reproducibility, and effective human control are not optional design choices. They
are externally imposed governance obligations. Section 2 explains why finance is a critical setting
for this problem.
Contributions. This paper makes three contributions to research on the governance of autonomous
information systems.
First, it theorizes verifiability as an authority–evidence relation. The Verifiability Gap is not
a general property of a model. It is the positive shortfall for a specific decision. On one side is
the verification demanded by the authority exercised. On the other is the faithful explanation and
material reproduction available to a named verifier under a given evidentiary standard and audit
lag. This moves the object of governance from the model to the complete decision system and the
evidence it retains.
Second, it develops a multilevel governance theory of evidence-contingent delegation. Seven
propositions explain how the same authority–evidence mismatch shapes governance at three levels.
Within firms, it constrains defensible delegation and control choices. Over time, it weakens historical
verification after material change. Across networks, it propagates through interorganizational hand
offs and shared providers. The resulting principle is that autonomous authority remains defensible
only while retained verification capacity remains commensurate with the authority exercised.
Third, it makes the central reproducibility mechanisms empirically observable. We separate four
targets: current outcome reproducibility, historical outcome reproducibility, material process repro
ducibility, and exact trace reproducibility. We use verdict differentiation to identify output collapse.
Three controlled studies identify distinct mechanisms. Provider change can alter both the historical
decision object and the available replay controls. Orchestration can change the operative decision
rule and decouple terminal verdicts from recorded traces. Perfect current replay can also coexist
with failure to recover a historical credit action. These studies identify mechanisms rather than
estimate their prevalence across financial institutions.
Methodologically, Studies 1 and 2 use thirty-two fixed, constructed financial cases to isolate
release, control-surface, and orchestration effects. Study 3 uses preserved versions of a transparent
credit model to separate current stability, historical fidelity, and explanation faithfulness at the
decision level. Figure 1 previews the argument and evidence that follow.
2. Agentic AI in FinTech
Agentic AI is shifting the role of artificial intelligence in finance from generating predictions, rec
ommendations, and content to performing coordinated financial work. Over the coming decade,
it is positioned to become a core component of the financial sector’s digital intelligence workforce.
This shift is already visible. JPMorgan Chase reports a wealth-management platform that in
cludes twenty-five specialized AI agents. Visa and Mastercard have introduced infrastructure for
agent-initiated commerce and payments, while FINRA identifies AI agents as an emerging focus in
financial services [JPMorganChase, 2026, Visa, 2025, Mastercard, 2025, Financial Industry Regula
tory Authority, 2026]. Together, these developments indicate that agentic systems are moving into
consequential financial workflows.
Three distinctions are foundational to our argument. The first concerns what separates an
agentic system from a conventional LLM application. The second concerns why trustworthy agentic
3
Figure 1: Roadmap of the paper’s argument: from the phenomenon (agentic AI that acts in finance),
to the construct (the Verifiability Gap) and its two deficits, to a falsifiable research agenda and an
evidence-contingent governance response.
AI requires the responsible institution to verify how consequential actions were produced. The third
concerns where the Verifiability Gap becomes most binding as decision authority shifts from people
to agentic systems.
2.1 From LLMs to Agentic AI
Conventional LLM applications primarily generate content in response to user prompts. Agentic AI
embeds this generative and reasoning capacity in a broader execution system that includes memory,
tools, data access, execution permissions, and orchestration mechanisms. It can therefore pursue a
goal through multiple decisions and actions rather than merely return an answer.
We define an agentic AI system as one composed of one or more LLM-based agents. These agents
can (a) interpret high-level goals, (b) decompose them into executable sub-tasks, and (c) invoke ex
ternal tools, models, and data. They can also (d) maintain state across steps, (e) act autonomously
or semi-autonomously within delegated authority, and (f) revise their plans in response to inter
mediate results [Baird and Maruping, 2021, Kumar et al., 2026, Wang et al., 2023]. Interleaving
generated reasoning with tool invocation is the mechanism that turns a language model into an
actor rather than a responder [Wei et al., 2022, Yao et al., 2022].
The enterprise frontier is multi-agent orchestration. Specialized agents may perform quantitative
analysis, compliance review, information retrieval, customer interaction, and execution. They may
interact through sequential, directed-acyclic, or cyclic communication structures [Rai et al., 2019,
Xiao et al., 2024].
The argument that follows turns on a small number of operating details of these systems. Table 1
states each one in plain terms, and notes what it governs. Three of them are the recurring subject
of this paper: what the institution can keep, what it can re-run, and what it can only observe.
This architecture changes the object of governance. A consequential financial action may emerge
from a distributed sequence of model states, prompts, retrieved records, memory updates, tool
responses, inter-agent messages, handoffs, and execution steps. A single agent’s trace may therefore
be insufficient to explain the joint outcome. Financial work becomes distributed across the agentic
system, while organizational and legal accountability remains with the institution that authorized
it. This separation creates the architectural conditions under which the Verifiability Gap can widen,
and it is a recognized source of harm as systems are granted progressively more agency [Chan et al.,
4
Table 1: Operating vocabulary used throughout the paper, and why each term matters for gover
nance.
Term
What it is
Why it matters here
Large
language
model (LLM)
Prompt
Sampling
Decoding settings
Tool call
Handoff
Execution trace
Release
version)
Executable
Replay
(model
Modal verdict
Software that writes text by repeatedly pre
dicting the next small fragment of text,
given everything before it.
The text handed to the model on one call:
the instructions plus the case at hand.
Choosing the next fragment at random
from the model’s ranked candidates rather
than always taking the top one.
The provider-exposed dials governing that
choice — here, temperature and random
seed.
A request the model emits for the surround
ing system to act — fetch a record, price an
instrument — and return the result.
The transfer of one agent’s output to the
next agent as its input.
The ordered record of one decision: every
agent output, tool call, handoff, and the fi
nal action.
The dated build of the provider’s model ac
tually served when the decision was made.
The specific fitted model, code, and settings
that produced a past decision — not what
ever is deployed today.
Re-running a preserved decision on pre
served inputs to see whether the same ac
tion results.
The action returned most often across re
peated executions of the same case.
The reasoning and language core; it
decides nothing on its own.
Part of the evidence a verifier needs;
if it is not kept, the call cannot be re
constructed.
The reason two runs of one input can
differ at all.
The institution’s only levers on repro
ducibility, and it owns neither.
Brings outside state into the decision;
that state must be kept to replay it.
Where evidence is compressed, and
where the paper locates evidentiary
loss.
The object a verifier reconstructs. Its
absence is the Verifiability Gap.
Changes on the provider’s schedule,
not the institution’s.
Historical verification is indexed to
this, not to the current system.
The empirical route to verification
when explanation is unavailable.
The summary this paper’s repro
ducibility measures compare against.
2023].
2.2 The Verifiability Mandate
Trustworthy-AI research in finance commonly emphasizes explainability, fairness, robustness, secu
rity, privacy, and accountability. These properties remain essential. Yet for the institution held
responsible for an agentic action, the central governance question is evidentiary: can it establish
that these properties held in the particular decision under review? This requirement is reinforced by
existing expectations concerning model-risk management, documentation, oversight, and account
ability [Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency, 2011, Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, 2024, European Parliament and Council,
2024]. A parallel literature asks what it takes to hold algorithmic systems accountable in practice,
and converges on retained evidence rather than disclosure alone: accountability requires records
that a reviewer can actually interrogate [Diakopoulos, 2016, Wieringa, 2020], internal audit proce
dures that run before and after deployment [Raji et al., 2020], and decision systems designed from
5
the outset to be reviewable [Cobbe et al., 2021].
Explainability and reproducibility provide two foundational conditions for answering this ques
tion. Explainability concerns whether the institution can establish why an action was taken. Repro
ducibility concerns whether it can reconstruct how the action was produced and determine whether
the relevant method and outcome can be reproduced under documented conditions [Gregor and
Benbasat, 1999, Rudin, 2019, Pineau et al., 2021, Atıl et al., 2025].
For agentic AI, both requirements extend beyond the final LLM output. They require a sufficient
record of the operative model version and state, prompts, retrieved information, memory, tool calls,
execution parameters, inter-agent communications, intermediate decisions, and resulting actions.
A repeated outcome without a reconstructable decision process provides only partial evidence.
Likewise, a plausible explanation generated after the event is inadequate if it cannot be connected
to the process that produced the action.
Consider an agentic trading system that submits an order. Aggregate performance or risk
measures do not explain why that particular trade occurred. The firm may need to reconstruct
the market data, risk constraints, prompts, analytical steps, agent handoffs, tool calls, and routing
decisions that produced the execution. Confirming only that the order occurred does not constitute
meaningful oversight.
Verifiability is therefore not a substitute for trustworthiness. It is a foundational evidentiary
condition under which trustworthiness can be demonstrated, audited, and contested. A system may
appear fair, robust, and secure in aggregate. Yet if its consequential actions cannot be explained or
reproduced, the responsible institution cannot establish whether those properties held in the specific
case being challenged. Without that evidence, human review risks becoming ex post approval rather
than meaningful organizational control.
2.3 Where the Verifiability Gap Binds: Domain and Delegated Autonomy
The Verifiability Gap does not arise uniformly across FinTech applications. Its importance depends
not only on the financial domain, but also on how much decision authority the institution delegates
to the agentic system. We therefore organize representative applications along two dimensions:
application domain and delegated autonomy. This is an analytical map rather than an exhaustive
catalog.
We distinguish four levels of delegated autonomy. At the assist level, the agent retrieves, orga
nizes, or summarizes information for a human decision maker. At the recommend level, it proposes
a course of action, but a human retains formal authority over the decision. At the act-with-approval
level, the agent executes an action after a human checkpoint. At the act-autonomously level, it
executes within a bounded mandate without case-by-case human authorization. Autonomy in this
framework therefore refers to delegated decision authority, not to the absence of organizational
constraints.
Verifiability pressure generally rises as authority moves from the human to the agentic system.
It is lower, but not absent, at the assist and recommend levels, particularly when human reviewers
defer to agent recommendations [Logg et al., 2019]. It becomes most consequential at the two act
levels, where the institution remains accountable for an action that it did not directly author.
Table 2 maps representative FinTech applications across this domain-by-autonomy space.
Three implications follow from this map. First, the same financial domain can contain materially
different governance conditions. An agent that summarizes a credit file and an agent that denies
the application may use similar models and data, but they exercise different levels of institutional
authority. The Verifiability Gap is therefore not a property of the application domain alone.
Second, the use of agents does not by itself determine the size of the gap. The gap depends on the
6
Table 2: Illustrative agentic AI applications in FinTech by domain and delegated autonomy. Ver
ifiability pressure generally rises from left to right as more decision authority is delegated to the
agentic system. (AML: anti-money laundering; A2A: agent-to-agent.)
Increasing delegated authority and verifiability pressure −→
Domain
Assist
Recommend
Act with approval
Act autonomously
Wealth man
agement
Compliance /
AML
Credit origina
tion
Trading
A2A
ment
settle
Surface portfolio, tax,
and market informa
tion
Summarize alerts and
retrieve evidence
Retrieve data and
draft credit memo
randa
Retrieve research and
generate signals
Match records and
identify breaks
Propose allocation or
rebalancing
Recommend alert dis
position
Recommend
ap
proval, pricing, or
limits
Propose trades or
strategies
Propose settlement
terms
Execute rebalancing af
ter sign-off
Escalate or close cases
after approval
Issue approved terms or
decisions
Conduct bounded rebalanc
ing and tax-loss harvesting
Continuously monitor and
take bounded case actions
Approve, deny, or price
credit within mandate
Submit approved orders Execute and adapt strate
gies within risk limits
Submit an approved set
tlement
Negotiate and settle di
rectly with other agents
relationship between delegated authority and verifiable control. Durable records, stable execution
controls, and reconstructable decision paths can make a highly autonomous system verifiable. By
contrast, a less autonomous system may be difficult to verify when its recommendations are routinely
accepted without meaningful review.
Third, the economic promise of agentic AI partly lies in moving financial work rightward across
the table. Multi-agent trading systems, for example, are designed not only to deliberate but also
to execute resulting trades [Xiao et al., 2024]. Yet the strongest expectations concerning documen
tation, model-risk management, auditability, and institutional accountability apply precisely where
the agentic system exercises the greatest authority [Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys
tem and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, 2011, Financial Industry Regulatory Authority,
2024]. The benefits of delegated execution and the need for verifiable control therefore increase
together.
The remainder of the paper focuses primarily on settings in which agents perform or materially
determine consequential financial actions. These settings occupy the act-with-approval and act
autonomously portions of the map. Here, verifiability becomes a binding organizational control
problem rather than merely a desirable system property.
3. Research Approach: FinTech Agentic AI Verifiability Gap
Our core question concerns the boundary of defensible delegation. When does the authority dele
gated to a FinTech agentic AI system exceed an organization’s capacity to explain and reproduce
its actions? Our unit of analysis is the complete agentic decision system: models, tools, memory,
orchestration, and controls, not just the isolated underlying model. The research follows three linked
stages:
1. Phenomenon Specification: Defining the analytical boundary within FinTech.
2. Theory Construction: Theorizing the Verifiability Gap as the joint failure of two partially com
pensating verification routes: explainability and reproducibility.
3. Controlled Mechanism Tests: Observing the theory’s reproducibility implications.
7
This design aims to identify mechanisms, rather than provide an exhaustive review or estimate
population-level prevalence.
3.1 Phenomenon Specification
We focus on LLM-based agentic systems that execute or drive significant financial actions, specif
ically at the act-with-approval or act-autonomously levels. At these stages, institutions remain
accountable for decisions generated by distributed technical systems. Literature and regulatory
sources highlight the shift from content generation to coordinated action. Our goal is to theorize
the mechanisms that affect verifiability, not to catalog all agentic AI applications.
3.2 Theory Construction
We build our theory by combining two concepts that are typically examined separately:
The explainability deficit. A fluent, plausible reasoning record may not faithfully represent the
actual decision-making process [Gregor and Benbasat, 1999, Jacovi and Goldberg, 2020, Lanham
et al., 2023, Turpin et al., 2023]. Interpretability itself remains contested in both definition and
evaluation [Lipton, 2018, Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017], and widely used post hoc attribution methods
can fail basic faithfulness checks [Ribeiro et al., 2016, Lundberg and Lee, 2017, Adebayo et al., 2018].
The reproducibility deficit. Re-executing a task under similar conditions may not yield the same
outcome or decision process [Pineau et al., 2021, Kapoor and Narayanan, 2023, Atıl et al., 2025,
Han, 2025]. This concern is long-standing in computational and machine-learning research, where
reported results have proven difficult to independently reproduce and where uncontrolled sources of
variance routinely exceed the effects under study [Peng, 2011, Gundersen and Kjensmo, 2018, Raff,
2019, Bouthillier et al., 2021].
The Verifiability Gap occurs when delegated authority expands while both verification routes
fail: the organization can neither establish why an action was taken nor reconstruct how it was
produced. Existing constructs such as the responsibility gap, inscrutability, and decision provenance
emphasize only one part of the problem. The Verifiability Gap instead theorizes the joint failure of
explainability and reproducibility at the agentic-system level. Table 3 summarizes this distinction.
Table 3: Positioning the Verifiability Gap against adjacent constructs. Existing constructs empha
size one verification route or treat reproducibility as given; the Verifiability Gap theorizes their joint
loss at the agentic-system level.
Construct
Explainability route Reproducibility route Agentic-system focus
Responsibility gap [Matthias, 2004]
Inscrutability [Berente et al., 2021]
Envelopment [Asatiani et al., 2021]
Provenance [Singh et al., 2019]
Contestability [Alfrink et al., 2023]
Verifiability Gap (this paper)
Implicit
Yes
Yes
Partial
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Assumed
No
Yes
No
Partial
No
No
No
Yes
This synthesis yields seven propositions organized across three governance levels. P1–P3 address
defensible delegation and control choices within the firm. P4–P5 address historical replay and
evidentiary validity after material change. P6–P7 address end-to-end and common-mode exposure
across organizational networks. The controlled studies examine central mechanisms underlying P4
and P5 and a system-internal analogue of the serial dependence in P6. The remaining organizational
and network consequences are specified as falsifiable propositions for subsequent field research.
8
3.3 Controlled Mechanism Tests
The empirical component comprises three linked but analytically distinct mechanism tests. Studies 1
and 2 share thirty-two fixed FinTech cases covering credit, trading, anti-money-laundering review,
and portfolio rebalancing. Study 1 varies dated provider releases and the execution controls available
for replay. Study 2 holds the locally served model, cases, and observed execution settings fixed
while changing the agentic architecture from one to fifty agents. Study 3 freezes two versions of
a transparent credit model and asks whether current stability, historical decision recovery, and
explanation faithfulness can diverge within one decision episode.
The studies operationalize central reproducibility mechanisms of the Verifiability Gap rather
than the full gap itself. They distinguish four targets: four distinct targets, defined in Section 7.1.
Verdict differentiation is tracked separately as a diagnostic of output collapse. This decomposition
prevents three distinct phenomena from being conflated. A current verdict may repeat even when the
historical action is no longer recoverable. A terminal action may recur while the recorded execution
path changes. Apparent stability may also improve because the system has stopped distinguishing
among cases.
The design is deliberately bounded for mechanism identification rather than population estima
tion. Figure 2 summarizes the research logic.
Figure 2: Research design. Phenomenon specification defines the analytical boundary in FinTech;
theory construction joins explainability and reproducibility in a seven-proposition architecture; and
three controlled studies examine central mechanisms through which retained verification capacity
can fall behind delegated authority.
4. The Verifiability Gap: Definition and Generative Mechanisms
Agentic systems shift financial AI from merely recommending actions to autonomously executing
them. This shift raises a critical governance question: can an institution later establish how that
delegated authority was exercised?
Prior research often treats opacity as the central governance problem. In agentic AI, however,
the issue is not simply whether the system is transparent. The institution remains responsible for
actions taken under the authority it delegates to the system. It must therefore be able to explain
why those actions were taken and reproduce the process that produced them. The Verifiability
Gap opens when delegated authority exceeds this verification capacity. This mismatch remains
underexamined in IS and FinTech research on agentic AI.
Verifiability Gap. We define the Verifiability Gap as a shortfall in retained verification capacity.
9
The gap arises when delegated agentic authority demands more verification than the organization
retains. That capacity must support both a faithful explanation of the resulting action and a
material reproduction of the process that produced it.
An Example. Consider an agentic system that evaluates loan applications. When the agent
merely recommends a denial for a human officer’s review, the delegated authority is low, and basic
logging may suffice.
However, if the institution authorizes the agent to execute the denial autonomously, the verifi
cation requirement sharply increases. A Verifiability Gap emerges if the bank cannot recover the
exact model version, tool outputs, and execution path necessary to faithfully explain and reproduce
that denial. The loan outcome itself may be identical, but the gap widens because the delegated
authority expanded without a commensurate increase in preserved verification capacity.
Let d denote a decision episode and q = (v,σ,τ) its audit context, comprising the verifier
(v), evidentiary standard (σ), and elapsed time since execution (τ). Let Ad denote the authority
exercised, ρσ(Ad) the verification required for that authority, and Vdq the verification capacity
retained by the system. The gap is:
Gdq =


 ρσ(Ad)
−
verification required
Vdq
verification available



(1)
+
where [x]+ = max{0,x}. Both terms are assessed on a common bounded scale defined by the
evidentiary standard.
Equation 1 distinguishes two concepts that prior frameworks often conflate: the verification
required by delegated authority and the verification capacity retained by the system. Delegated
authority is not itself a deficit. It sets the evidentiary burden that the institution must meet after
an action is taken. A Verifiability Gap becomes binding when retained capacity falls below this
requirement. In our framework, this occurs when both routes to verification: faithful explanation
and material reproduction are impaired. If either route remains sufficient, the institution faces a
localized deficit rather than the full Verifiability Gap.
The construct therefore captures the institution’s shortfall in substantiating how delegated au
thority was exercised, independent of whether the resulting decision happened to be accurate, fair,
or profitable. As Figure 3 illustrates, the gap is a joint failure. The value of Gdq formalizes the
resulting organizational exposure. When Gdq = 0, retained evidence meets the verification require
ment created by the delegated authority. When Gdq > 0, its value represents the magnitude of the
verifiability shortfall and the associated governance exposure.
4.1 What the Verifiability Gap Measures: Specific Financial Decisions
The formula does not measure an agentic system’s general verifiability. It measures the verification
shortfall produced by the complete FinTech agentic system in one specific financial decision. In
the examples above, the relevant unit is therefore not the lending, trading, or fraud-management
system in general, but a particular loan denial, executed trade, or fraud disposition. Each decision
may involve different data, tool calls, system states, delegated authority, and retained evidence.
Accordingly, d denotes a specific financial decision episode. The episode includes the case pre
sented to the system, the decision process executed, the resulting financial action, and the evidence
retained for subsequent verification. The complete FinTech agentic system includes its model, data
sources, tools, memory, orchestration, and execution controls. This system produces the decision
episode. It therefore determines both the authority exercised, Ad, and the verification capacity later
10
Figure 3: Conditions under which the Verifiability Gap becomes binding. The gap is most conse
quential when delegated agentic authority coincides with deficits in both explainability and repro
ducibility.
available, Vdq. Thus, the complete system is the source of the Verifiability Gap, while the specific
financial decision is the unit for which the gap is calculated.
4.2 Verification Capacity in the Verifiability Gap: Explainability and Reproducibility
Consider again the loan denial described above. The institution may possess two distinct forms of
evidence for verifying that decision. The first route is explainability, represented by Edq. It requires
evidence that connects the denial to the applicant data, tool outputs, and lending rules actually
used. A rationale generated after the decision is insufficient unless it faithfully corresponds to the
executed process. Counterfactual accounts of the form “the outcome would have differed had this
factor been different” have been proposed precisely for automated decisions of this kind [Wachter
et al., 2017], and they presuppose a decision function that can still be interrogated.
The second route is reproducibility, represented by Rdq. It requires evidence that reconstructs
the materially relevant decision process. That evidence includes the recorded application data,
credit and income-verification outputs, policy and model versions, tool calls, and execution states.
Producing the same denial through different data, rules, or controls does not reproduce how the
delegated authority was originally exercised.
These forms of evidence are distinct. A bank may preserve a faithful explanation for the denial
while lacking the data or system states required to reconstruct it. Conversely, it may rerun the
recorded process and reproduce the denial while remaining unable to establish why particular factors
determined the result. Verification capacity is therefore:
Vdq = Vσ(Edq,Rdq),
where the evidentiary standard σ determines whether explainability, reproducibility, or both are
11
required to verify decision d.
4.3 Why Serial FinTech Agent Architectures Widen the Verifiability Gap
Serial dependence is causal dependence. Serial dependence is a central architectural mechanism that
can widen the Verifiability Gap in FinTech. For a financial decision episode d, a serial dependency
exists when a state produced by one agent becomes a causally material input or constraint for a
downstream agent. A transferred state is causally material when, under a relevant counterfactual,
changing that state could change a downstream assessment, control determination, or final financial
action. Seriality therefore concerns causal dependence, not merely temporal order or agent count.
Serial dependence is broadly relevant because many consequential FinTech workflows decompose
financial decisions into specialized stages, including data acquisition, verification, risk analysis,
policy review, and execution. Recent agentic designs similarly organize financial tasks around
specialized roles and hierarchical handoffs [Xiao et al., 2024, Kumar et al., 2026]. The mechanism
is not limited to a purely linear chain. It also applies to hierarchical and mixed serial–parallel
architectures whenever the executed financial action depends on at least one causally material serial
path.
Seriality refers to causal dependence
Altering the transferred state alters the downstream assessment, control check, or final financial action.
Figure 4: Serial dependence in a FinTech loan-denial workflow. Causally dependent handoffs can
weaken end-to-end explainability and reproducibility, reducing verification capacity while broader
delegated authority increases verification demand.
Consider a loan-denial episode. A verification agent omits a source of variable income when
summarizing an income-verification response. The downstream underwriting agent consequently
calculates a debt-to-income ratio above the lending threshold, a policy-control agent accepts that
assessment, and an execution agent denies the loan. The final explanation may faithfully report
that the application was denied because the ratio exceeded the threshold. Yet it fails to reveal that
12
the ratio depended on an upstream omission. The explanation is therefore locally faithful to the
terminal decision while remaining globally incomplete as an account of the institutional action. If
the original tool response and transferred state were not retained, the institution may also be unable
to reconstruct the process that produced the denial. An insufficiently captured serial handoff can
thus weaken both routes to verification simultaneously. Figure 4 summarizes this mechanism.
Serial decay of explainability. End-to-end explainability requires a faithful evidentiary link from
the final financial action back through every causally material transformation. A terminal agent’s
rationale, standing alone, accounts only for the mapping from the state it received to the action it
selected. As information moves through serial handoffs, underlying evidence may be compressed into
summaries, interpretations, or intermediate judgments. Upstream omissions can therefore become
embedded premises for downstream agents. Unless these transformations are preserved and linked
to the final action, an explanation can remain locally plausible while failing to account for the
end-to-end decision process.
Serial decay of reproducibility. End-to-end reproducibility requires the materially relevant states to
be reconstructed in the sequence in which they shaped the financial action. Every downstream agent
conditions its output on a state produced upstream. If an early retrieval, transformation, summary,
or tool response diverges, subsequent agents operate on a different context. A fixed random seed
cannot repair this dependence: applying the same seed to a different conditioning state does not
recreate the original decision process.
To state this mechanism precisely, let dn and dn+1 denote counterfactually comparable decision
episodes that differ only in the addition of one causally material serial transition. We hold the
financial case, delegated authority, audit context, and verification controls constant. We also assume
that the added transition provides no compensating verification artifact:
Edn+1q ≤ Ednq,
Rdn+1q ≤ Rdnq.
(2)
The inequality is strict for explainability when the added transition loses or obscures causally
relevant evidence. It is strict for reproducibility when the transferred state cannot be reconstructed
under the recorded conditions. Equality is route-specific. The added transition must preserve either
the evidence needed for explanation or the state needed for reproduction. It must do so with enough
fidelity to satisfy the applicable evidentiary standard.
The theoretical driver is therefore dependence, not agent count. Parallel agents whose outputs
are independently retained do not incur this specific cumulative dependence across branches. How
ever, when a downstream agent summarizes, filters, approves, or executes their combined outputs,
the aggregation step reintroduces serial dependence.
The Double Effect. The theoretical significance of seriality lies in its potential double effect. By co
ordinating specialized agents across data collection, risk assessment, control review, and execution,
a serial architecture can enable institutions to delegate broader and more consequential financial
authority, increasing ρσ(Ad). At the same time, every causally material handoff adds another state
whose evidentiary content must be preserved for explainability and whose execution conditions must
be reconstructed for reproducibility. Failures of preservation can therefore reduce Edq and Rdq, and
consequently lower Vdq. When broader delegation and weaker verification capacity occur together,
serial architectures widen the Verifiability Gap from both sides: they increase the verification de
manded while reducing the verification capacity retained.
13
4.4 Governance Requires a Reversible Chain
The double effect can be stated exactly. Doing so converts the verbal mechanism into a constraint on
architecture, and it supplies the common scale that Equation 1 presumes. Proofs are in Appendix S2.
Index the model calls in a topological order of the communication graph, write Sk for the outputs
of layer k, T for the complete trace, and Y = g(T) for the financial action. The governance design
imposes one restriction that we use directly: only the first layer observes the original case, and every
downstream agent observes only the records transmitted along designated edges. Writing C for the
case, the joint law therefore factorizes as a Markov chain,
C −→ S1 −→ S2 −→ ··· −→ Sd −→ Y.
(3)
This is not an assumption adopted for tractability. It is the information-access rule the architecture
enforces, and it is what makes an agentic pipeline auditable at all.
Auditing runs in the opposite direction from execution. A verifier is handed an action and asked
to establish how it was produced. That is an inverse problem on (3), and the property it demands
has a name.
Definition 1 (σ-reversibility). Let ≡σ denote material equivalence under the evidentiary standard
σ, with classes [·]σ. Stage k is σ-reversible given retained record Ek if (Sk,Ek) → [Sk−1]σ is well
defined almost surely. A configuration is σ-reversible if every causally material stage is, so that the
verifier can reconstruct [T]σ from Y and the retained bundle E.
Remark 1. We do not mean time-reversibility in the detailed-balance sense. The relevant question
is whether the earlier state can be recovered from what was retained.
The next result uses one standard quantity. Write I(C;Y ) for the mutual information between
the case and the action. Informally, it is how much the executed action tells you about which case
was being decided. It is zero when the action is the same whatever the case. It is largest when each
case draws its own action.
The result rests on one classical fact, the data-processing inequality. Passing a signal through a
further stage of processing cannot create information the stage never received. The coefficient ηk
below records how much of that information a given layer lets through. At ηk = 1 the layer loses
none.
Theorem 1 (Serial contraction of discrimination). Under (3), I(C;Y ) ≤ I(C;Sd) ≤ ··· ≤
I(C;S1) ≤ H(C). If ηk denotes the strong data-processing coefficient of the layer-k channel, then
I(C;Y ) ≤ k≥2ηk I(C;S1), so discrimination decays geometrically in depth whenever ηk ≤ ¯η < 1.
In plain terms: what the final action can reveal about which case was decided never grows as the
pipeline deepens, and shrinks geometrically once each layer loses anything.
Corollary 1. No downstream agent, aggregation rule, critic, or terminal decider can raise I(C;Y )
above I(C;S1). Case information not captured by the first layer is unrecoverable by any later stage,
however capable.
Theorem 2 (Reversibility is equality in the data-processing inequality). With no retained record,
the following are equivalent: (i) stage k is σ-reversible; (ii) I(C;Sk) = I(C;Sk−1), i.e. ηk = 1;
(iii) Sk is a sufficient statistic for C relative to Sk−1, carrying everything the upstream state carried
about the case; (iv) the stage map is injective on the support of Sk−1 modulo ≡σ.
14
In plain terms: a stage is auditable exactly when it has thrown nothing away. Auditability and
information preservation are not two related properties but one. The next result says what that
costs.
Theorem 3 (Specialization and reversibility are incompatible). If stage k performs summarization
in the ordinary sense—deterministic and not injective modulo ≡σ—then ηk < 1 strictly, the stage is
not σ-reversible with a trivial record, and there exist materially distinct upstream states the verifier
cannot separate from the downstream record. Conversely, a stage that is σ-reversible with a trivial
record performs no material compression; it merely relabels.
In plain terms: a stage either summarizes or stays auditable. It cannot do both.
This is the double effect as a dichotomy. The operation that makes specialized delegation
worthwhile—compressing an upstream state into an actionable summary—is precisely the operation
that destroys reconstructability. An architecture cannot obtain the first without incurring the
second. The choice available to an institution is therefore not whether to lose reversibility, but
whether to pay to restore it.
One further symbol is needed. Write H(X) for the entropy of a quantity X: the average number
of bits required to record which value X took. It is zero when X never varies. It grows with the
number of distinct values X takes and how evenly it takes them. H(X | Z) is the same count once
Z is already known. So H([T]σ | Y) below counts the bits still needed to pin down the material
process after the action is known.
Theorem 4 (Retention lower bound). A configuration is σ-reversible given E only if
H(E) ≥ H[T]σ Y ,
(4)
and the bound is achieved by retaining, at each stage, an index of the material equivalence class of
the upstream state within the pre-image of the downstream state. The evidence bundle must be at
least as large as the information the pipeline destroys.
In plain terms: to keep a decision reconstructable, the institution must store at least as many bits
as its pipeline threw away.
Corollary 2 (The Verifiability Gap in bits). Instantiating the verification required by the authority
exercised as the reconstruction requirement H([T]σ | Y ), and the verification capacity retained as
H(E),
Gdq = H[T]σ |Y −H(E)
+
(5)
is well defined in bits and equals zero exactly when the configuration is σ-reversible given what was
kept.
Corollary 2 constructs the common bounded scale that Equation 1 presumes. The two sides
become commensurable because both are measured in the same units: the information a verifier
needs, and the information the institution kept.
Corollary 3 (Retention must grow with depth). Each materially compressing stage contributes a
strictly positive term to (4). The retention required to hold Gdq = 0 is therefore non-decreasing in
the number of causally material stages and strictly increasing in the number that compress. Deeper
orchestration does not merely risk auditability; it raises the evidentiary price of the same autonomy.
15
5. TheVerifiability Gap in FinTech AI Agents: Scope and Governance Threshold
The Verifiability Gap must therefore be governed in FinTech. Otherwise, agentic systems may
exercise consequential financial authority without sufficient explainability or reproducibility. Insti
tutions and regulators would then be unable to substantiate those decisions. We therefore specify
when the gap applies and the threshold at which it emerges.
The Verifiability Gap asks whether a named verifier, such as an internal risk committee or
external regulator, can obtain sufficient evidence to substantiate a delegated financial decision.
It differs from three related ideas. The responsibility gap concerns who can be held responsible
when autonomous systems contribute to harm [Matthias, 2004]; the Verifiability Gap can exist
even when a decision is accurate and profitable. Inscrutability concerns whether a system can
be understood [Berente et al., 2021]; the Verifiability Gap concerns whether its decision can be
substantiated through sufficient explainability or reproducibility. Provenance records the origin
and custody of artifacts [Singh et al., 2019]; the Verifiability Gap asks whether those artifacts are
sufficient to substantiate a specific decision. Finally, while model-risk management assumes that
independent validation remains possible [Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, 2011], the Verifiability Gap identifies when retained
verification capacity no longer meets the level required by delegated authority.
Explainability and reproducibility can compensate for one another. A Verifiability Gap therefore
arises only when neither is sufficient to meet the verification required for the delegated decision.
The Verifiability Gap applies within four boundaries:
1. It concerns ex post verification of a completed financial decision, not ex ante model testing.
2. It concerns the ability to substantiate a decision, not whether the decision is accurate, fair,
legal, or profitable.
3. It applies only when an agentic system exercises substantive delegated authority. Nominal or
“rubber-stamp” human approval does not eliminate the gap, since placing a person in the loop
does not by itself produce substantive review [Green and Chen, 2019].
4. It is assessed for a specific decision episode and audit context, not as an inherent property of
a model.
Equation 1 defines the governance threshold:
Gdq = 0 ⇐⇒ Vdq ≥ρσ(Ad).
Conversely, a Verifiability Gap exists, Gdq > 0, when Vdq < ρσ(Ad).
(6)
This threshold does not require financial institutions to minimize AI autonomy. It requires the
verification capacity retained after a decision to meet or exceed the verification required by the
authority exercised. The threshold identifies three direct governance levers:
• Lower the requirement: Narrow the financial authority that an agentic system can exercise
without substantive human review.
• Raise explainability: Preserve artifact-grounded traces sufficient to substantiate the end-to
end decision process.
• Raise reproducibility: Preserve model and tool versions, financial data, configurations, inter
mediate states, and execution conditions required for a materially equivalent rerun.
16
The propositions that follow explain how delegated authority, explainability, and reproducibility
change within firms, during regulatory supervision, and across inter-firm agent-to-agent (A2A)
networks.
6. From the Verifiability Gap to Multilevel Governance Consequences
The Verifiability Gap is a governance exposure, not a rebranded AI risk. It emerges when the veri
fication demanded by delegated authority exceeds an institution’s retained capacity to substantiate
that authority. This capacity relies on two complementary routes: explainability and reproducibility.
Delegated financial authority creates an evidentiary demand, ρσ(Ad). Conversely, the operative
agentic system determines the actual retained evidence. This system comprises models, tools,
memory, orchestration, provider interfaces, and organizational controls. This architecture dictates
whether an institution can substantiate a challenged decision.
Thus, our central claim goes beyond “agentic AI is opaque” or “LLMs are nondeterministic”. An
agentic system can remain highly capable, accurate, and behaviorally stable. Yet, the institution
may still become entirely unable to substantiate how that system exercised its delegated authority.
Seven propositions. To address this governance exposure, we advance seven propositions tracing
how this authority–evidence mismatch produces three classes of consequences: firm-level, regulatory
level, and network-level.
• Thefirmlevel (P1–P3) explains how the gap constrains delegated authority and control choices
inside the FinTech firm.
• The regulatory level (P4–P5) explains why compliance that appears adequate at deployment
can lose substantive force during an audit.
• The network level (P6–P7) explains how local verification deficits cascade into end-to-end and
common-mode exposures across organizational networks.
These are not seven independent risks. They are multilevel governance consequences of the same
fundamental gap.
6.1 Firm-Level Consequences
At the firm level, the Verifiability Gap has three structural consequences. It caps defensible dele
gation, reweights the value of governance controls, and creates a tradeoff between verifiability and
efficiency.
Delegated authority is bounded by institutional defensibility. Technical capability dictates what an
agentic system can do, but institutional defensibility dictates what it may be authorized to do. Let
c denote maximum technical autonomy, a granted autonomy, V retained verification capacity, and
κ task consequence. The maximum defensible autonomy is:
a∗(c, V,κ) = sup{a ≤ c : ρσ(a,κ) ≤ V}.
(7)
Equation 7 establishes an authority ceiling. Beyond this point, new technical capabilities expand
feasible actions but not defensible ones. This ceiling rises with greater verification capacity and falls
as financial stakes increase [Baird and Maruping, 2021, Tibebu, 2026].
17
P1 (Firms delegate only what they can later defend). Conditional on technical capability,
a firm’s retained verification capacity shapes the autonomy it grants to a FinTech agentic
system. Autonomy will increase with that capacity until the technical ceiling is reached.
When that capacity remains fixed, granted autonomy will plateau as capability rises,
and the plateau will be lower for more consequential financial tasks.
Uncertain explainability changes the relative value of controls. Explainability only aids review if
the disclosed rationale is causally faithful. Let ϕ denote confidence in faithfulness. Let δF and δU
denote the probabilities that explanation-based review detects and prevents a fault before execution
under faithful and unfaithful explanations, respectively. Let b denote the probability that an action
bound blocks the fault. Action bounds become the superior safeguard when:
b >ϕδF +(1−ϕ)δU,
δF >δU.
(8)
As confidence (ϕ) drops, action bounds become relatively more dependable than explanation
based review (Equation 8). Fluent but unfaithful explanations exacerbate this by making faulty
decisions appear considered, suppressing reviewer scrutiny and driving δU even lower [Goddard
et al., 2012, Turpin et al., 2023]. While explainability and bounds remain complements, uncertain
faithfulness forces the governance burden onto hard constraints.
P2 (When explainability is unreliable, firms must constrain actions). As uncertainty
about explanation faithfulness increases, action-bounding controls will outperform re
view based on explanation records alone. Specifically, they will produce a lower conse
quential fault-escape rate. The difference will be greatest when the record is fluent but
unfaithful.
Verifiable autonomy has an operating cost. Controls that preserve verifiability include version pin
ning, environment replay, deterministic settings, and substantive human approval. These controls
reduce the operational speed and flexibility that make agentic AI attractive. Let x be control inten
sity, m the task’s adaptation requirement, V (x;θ) verification capacity, and Y (x,m;θ) operating
performance. Within a fixed architecture:
Vx >0,
Yx <0,
Yxm <0,
dY
dV θ,m 
= Yx
Vx 
<0.
(9)
Equation 9 defines a verifiability–efficiency frontier. While better architectures can push this
frontier outward, firms cannot treat verifiability as costless. This operational tax is greater for tasks
requiring frequent adaptation.
P3 (Making agents verifiable costs speed and flexibility). Within a fixed technical ar
chitecture, stronger controls that preserve explainability and reproducibility impose an
operating cost. They reduce the speed, flexibility, or scope of autonomous action. The
operating penalty will be greater for tasks requiring frequent adaptation.
This tradeoff compounds dynamically. Substantive human review is a core component of ver
ification capacity. If reviewers routinely rubber-stamp agent outputs, their domain expertise and
scrutiny deteriorate due to automation bias [Fügener et al., 2021, Goddard et al., 2012, Skitka et al.,
1999, Parasuraman and Riley, 1997]. Consequently, the Verifiability Gap widens over time even if
the technical system remains unchanged.
18
Corollary to P3 (Skipping oversight today makes governance harder tomorrow). A firm’s
human verification capacity will decline when it operates a high-autonomy system for
longer without substantive human verification. This decline widens the Verifiability Gap
even if the technical system remains unchanged.
6.2 Regulatory and Temporal Consequences
Historical reproducibility depends on preserved change, not time alone. Reproducing a past agentic
decision requires more than merely resubmitting the original financial case. The verifier must
reconstruct the exact historical execution environment: the specific model versions, system prompts,
the settings that govern how the model chooses its words, retrieved data, tool responses, inter-agent
messages, orchestration logic, and control rules. If a provider alters any of these components post
deployment and the original state was not explicitly pinned or escrowed, later re-execution tests a
fundamentally different system.
Let j index system changes that occur before audit lag τ. Let µdj denote the materiality of
change j to the complete decision chain for d, including propagated downstream effects. Let pdj = 1
when the historical state affected by that change was preserved. Cumulative exposure to unpinned
material change is:
Md(τ) =
µdj(1 − pdj),
j:tj≤τ
Rdq = r(Md(τ)),
r(M +∆M)≤r(M) for ∆M ≥0. (10)
Equation 10 assigns no direct effect to elapsed time. Audit lag (τ) degrades historical repro
ducibility only because it widens the window for unpinned material changes (Md(τ)) to accumulate.
Because these changes are discrete such as a model release or API deprecation, reproducibility loss
is typically abrupt rather than a smooth, continuous temporal decay [Pineau et al., 2021, Atıl et al.,
2025].
P4 (System changes make old decisions harder to reproduce). Unpinned changes make
past agentic financial decisions harder to reproduce. The likelihood of material repro
duction will decrease with the cumulative number and materiality of those changes.
Audit lag will reduce historical reproducibility only insofar as it increases exposure to
such changes.
Serial agent governance requires chain-level preservation. In a serial architecture, the auditable
object is not an isolated agent or the final output. It is the unbroken chain of causally material
states. Seriality implies causal dependence: altering a transferred state alters a downstream risk
assessment, control check, or final action. Consequently, every intermediate message, tool output,
and approval signal becomes a critical component of the historical execution environment.
Preserving individual agents is useless if these intermediate handoffs are overwritten, compressed,
or omitted. An unpinned upstream change propagates through every downstream agent, increasing
µdj in Equation 10. Serial architectures thus multiply the number of states that must be perfectly
preserved to retain Rdq and Edq. By enabling broader delegated authority (ρσ(Ad)) while simul
taneously multiplying the points of potential evidentiary failure, serial systems can severely widen
the Verifiability Gap from both ends.
Corollary to P4 (Serial systems require chain-level preservation). Historical reproducibil
ity will decrease with the number and materiality of causally dependent inter-agent
19
handoffs exposed to unpinned change. Preserving individual agents or final outputs will
not be sufficient when intermediate states shape downstream financial actions.
Explainability requires faithful evidence of the agentic decision chain. In FinTech agentic systems,
explainability requires more than a post hoc rationale for the final action. It depends on capturing
the causally material states that actually drove the decision: model outputs, tool responses, inter
agent messages, and control decisions. In a serial architecture, a terminal agent might generate a
fluent justification that completely masks a critical upstream error or altered state. Such a rationale
fails to substantiate how delegated authority was exercised.
Let Cdq ∈ [0,1] denote the coverage of causally material states in the retained record and
ϕdq ∈ [0,1] its validated causal faithfulness. The actual explainability evidence retained is:
Edq = Cdqϕdq,
∂Edq
∂Cdq 
= ϕdq,
ϕdq = 0 =⇒ Edq =0.
(11)
Equation 11 demonstrates that expanding record coverage (Cdq) increases explainability only
if those records are causally faithful (ϕdq). If faithfulness is zero, even exhaustive logging yields
zero evidentiary value. Faithfulness is the vital link converting raw agentic states into substantive
verification evidence [Gregor and Benbasat, 1999, Jacovi and Goldberg, 2020, Lanham et al., 2023,
Turpin et al., 2023].
P5 (Agentic explanations count only when they track the decision chain). The retained
explainability of a FinTech agentic decision depends on evidence across the entire deci
sion chain. It increases with both the coverage and causal faithfulness of that evidence.
It increases strictly in either dimension when the other is positive. A fluent terminal
rationale adds no verification capacity for causally material upstream states that it omits
or misrepresents.
6.3 Network-Level Consequences
End-to-end verification is bounded by the weakest handoff. Agentic financial decisions increasingly
cross organizational lines. An upstream agent might supply a risk score or compliance check. A
downstream institution then acts on it. This transfer is a “handoff.” A handoff matters—it is
causally material—if changing the transferred state, while holding other execution conditions fixed,
changes the final decision.
Let h index these handoffs and sh denote the transferred state. Let Zdh(sh) denote the final
downstream action under that state, holding all other execution conditions fixed. We define causal
materiality as:
χdh = 1 ∃sh ̸ =s′
h : Zdh(sh) ̸ = Zdh(s′
h) ,
Hm
d = {h : χdh = 1}.
(12)
Equation 12 separates trivial data transfers from causally material ones. A causally material
handoff alters the final decision path. To verify the final action, every participant must save the
exact data it received and the logic it applied to that data [Singh et al., 2019, South et al., 2025].
If the record of one causally material handoff is unavailable, the chain breaks. Downstream firms
might still audit their own local steps. However, nobody can reconstruct the true basis of the final
action. Serial chains therefore face a weakest-link constraint. The danger is not simply having more
firms involved. The danger is that evidence must survive every causally material transfer.
20
Let Vdhq ∈ [0,1] denote the verification capacity retained at handoff h. Let Fdh denote an
evidentiary failure at that step. If Bdn is the end-to-end failure event across n causally material
handoffs, then:
VE2E
dq
≤ min
h∈Hm
d 
Vdhq,
n
Bdn =
h=1
Fdh,
min
h∈Hm
d 
Vdhq = 0 =⇒ V E2E
dq
=0,
Pr(Bd,n+1) − Pr(Bdn) = Pr(Fd,n+1 ∩ Bc
dn) ≥ 0.
(13)
Equation 13 establishes two rules. First, end-to-end verification cannot exceed the weakest
causally material handoff. Second, adding more handoffs cannot reduce the chance of an audit
failure. The increase is strict whenever the new handoff introduces a positive failure possibility not
already contained in the existing chain.
P6 (One missing record breaks the whole chain). In multi-firm agent networks, overall
verification capacity is limited by the weakest causally material handoff. Additional
handoffs create more potential points of evidentiary failure. They will therefore increase
the risk of an end-to-end audit failure, even when individual firms audit their own local
steps perfectly.
Shared providers create synchronized audit failures. Firms often appear to run independent AI
systems. In reality, they frequently rely on the same shared model or API. When a provider updates
or removes that shared tool, execution conditions change for everyone. This creates a shared risk.
A single upstream update can prevent multiple firms from auditing their past decisions at the same
time [Financial Stability Board, 2024, European Central Bank, 2024].
Relying on a shared provider is not inherently fatal. Firms can pin specific versions, escrow
models, or build fallbacks. A shared audit vulnerability exists when firms cannot control historical
replay.
Let uig ∈ [0,1] denote institution i’s reliance on shared component g. Let ηig ∈ [0,1] denote
its control over historical replay. Its uncontrolled exposure is eig = uig(1 − ηig). Let Zg denote the
random magnitude of a material upstream change and Lig the resulting loss of reproducibility. If
ωi is the firm’s network weight, then:
eig = uig(1−ηig),
Lig = eigZg,
Lnet
g =Zg
ωieig,
i
Cov(Lig,Lkg) = eigekg Var(Zg) > 0,
(14)
for institutions i and k with positive exposure to the same component and Var(Zg) > 0. Equa
tion 14 separates basic reliance from uncontrolled exposure. Reliance becomes an audit risk when
institutions cannot replay past versions. As uncontrolled exposure grows, network-wide losses accu
mulate. Because one upstream change causes losses across every exposed firm, their audit failures
become synchronized.
P7 (Shared models create shared audit failures). Many financial institutions may rely
on the same uncontrolled AI provider. In that setting, a material upstream update
will create a larger and more synchronized loss of historical reproducibility across the
network.
Table 4 summarizes the multilevel governance architecture developed across P1–P7.
21
Table 4: The multilevel governance architecture of the Verifiability Gap.
Prop. Governance level and
outcome
Mechanism
Observable implication
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
Firm: delegated authority
Firm: fault escape
Firm: operating trade-off
Regulatory: historical fi
delity
Regulatory:
validity
evidentiary
Network: end-to-end veri
fication
Network: common-mode
exposure
Retained verification capacity limits
defensible authority.
Unfaithful explanations weaken human
review.
Preserving evidence consumes speed,
flexibility, and expertise.
Material unpinned changes break con
tinuity with the prior execution envi
ronment.
Faithfulness turns compliance artifacts
into substantive evidence.
Every causally material handoff must
preserve its own evidence.
Shared
unpinned
infrastructure
changes many systems at once.
Granted authority plateaus be
low technical capability.
Action
bounds
outperform
explanation-based review as
faithfulness uncertainty rises.
Firms face a strict verifiability
efficiency frontier.
Historical-fidelity failures clus
ter around system updates, not
elapsed time.
Documentation can increase
without improving actual au
ditability.
One missing record prevents full
end-to-end reconstruction.
Historical-fidelity failures clus
ter across nominally independent
firms.
7. Experiments on the Governance Mechanisms of the Verifiability Gap
The preceding theory defines the Verifiability Gap as a governance exposure. It arises when del
egated authority exceeds the evidence retained to substantiate how that authority was exercised.
We now examine controlled manifestations of the mechanisms that can produce this exposure. The
experiments do not estimate the prevalence of the Verifiability Gap across financial institutions,
nor do they directly test every firm-, regulatory-, and network-level consequence developed in Sec
tion 6. Instead, they isolate how provider change, execution-control loss, serial orchestration, trace
divergence, output collapse, and model-version change can cause conventional audit indicators to
overstate retained verification capacity.
The evidence comprises three linked studies. Studies 1 and 2 hold constructed financial cases
fixed while varying provider release, execution controls, or orchestration. Study 3 holds two frozen
versions of a transparent credit model against each other, testing whether current outcome repro
ducibility, historical outcome reproducibility, and faithful explainability can diverge within the same
decision episode. Together, the studies ask not merely whether an answer repeats, but whether the
institution retains evidence sufficient to substantiate the delegated authority that produced it.
7.1 Reproducibility Is a Governance Profile, Not a Scalar
Agentic governance must not collapse distinct phenomena into one misleading metric. We therefore
decompose “reproducibility” into four explicit targets. They are current outcome reproducibility,
historical outcome reproducibility, material process reproducibility, and exact trace reproducibility.
Let y0 c denote the historical financial action recorded for decision episode c at time t0. Let z0 c
denote its recorded historical process trace. The trace includes materially relevant states, communi
cations, tool invocations, and handoffs. Let yc,k(t) and zc,k(t) denote the action and corresponding
process trace obtained on repetition k under the environment available at time t. Throughout, C
is the set of decision episodes under test, K the number of repetitions executed per episode, and L
22
the set of actions the system is permitted to take.
Current outcome reproducibility. This metric operationalizes within-environment reproducibil
ity: whether today’s environment returns a stable action across repeated executions:
RO(t) = 1
|C| c∈C 
1
K max
ℓ∈L
K
k=1
1[yc,k(t) = ℓ].
(15)
High RO(t) establishes current stability across the observed repetitions. It does not prove that the
system reproduces the historical decision.
Historical outcome reproducibility. This metric asks whether current re-execution recreates the
exact historical action recorded at t0:
RH(t) = 1
|C|Kc∈C
K
k=1
1yc,k(t) = y0
c .
(16)
In controlled studies, the baseline is an experimental condition rather than a single deployed decision.
We therefore use the baseline modal verdict as a transparent proxy:
RH(t) = 1
|C| c∈C 
1[yc(t) = yc(t0)].
(17)
Here, yc(t) denotes the modal verdict across repetitions for case c at time t. We refer to RH(t) as
baseline-modal historical fidelity.
Material process reproducibility. This metric asks whether the materially relevant historical
process can be reconstructed to satisfy the applicable evidentiary standard (σ):
RP(t;σ) = 1
|C|Kc∈C
K
k=1
1zc,k(t) ≡σ z0
c ,
(18)
where ≡σ denotes material equivalence. This standard is deliberately weaker than raw textual
identity: a changed comma is immaterial, but a changed risk threshold is decisive.
Exact trace reproducibility. Modeling reproducibility specifically for multi-agent architectures
requires capturing the complete, cascading chain of inter-agent communications, tool invocations,
and state handoffs. We formalize this diagnostic as exact trace reproducibility (RT). It asks whether
the entire multi-agent execution sequence reproduces perfectly across independent runs:
RT(t) = 1
|C| c∈C 
1[zc,1(t) = ··· = zc,K(t)].
(19)
If RT(t) < 1, the multi-agent decision process is not exactly reproducible across all observed runs.
Benign textual variation, such as a rephrased internal summary, does not automatically constitute
a material governance failure under ≡σ. We therefore treat exact trace reproducibility as a strict
diagnostic of within-environment process stability. It is not a direct substitute for RP.
Verdict differentiation as a degeneracy diagnostic. High RO(t) is highly misleading if an agent
simply defaults to the same blanket action for every case. We therefore track DV (t), the normalized
within-family verdict spread. This measure diagnoses output collapse. When RO(t) rises while
DV(t) falls for a case family that requires differentiated verdicts, the system has lost its ability to
distinguish cases. The resulting stability is degenerate.
23
The true empirical object is therefore a profile:
R(t;σ) = RO(t),RH(t),RP(t;σ),RT(t);DV(t) .
(20)
The semicolon separates the four reproducibility targets from DV (t), which serves as a degeneracy
diagnostic rather than an additional reproducibility target.
Three operational patterns are especially consequential for governance:
• RO =1 but RH <1: The current system is perfectly stable, but historical decision recovery
is incomplete.
• RO is high but RT = 0: Stable final decisions coexist with trace-level non-reproducibility
across every case, even though the material governance significance of that variation still
depends on RP.
• RO rises while DV falls: Apparent reproducibility is degenerate when the increase in stability
is achieved by collapsing cases requiring differentiated assessment toward the same blanket
action.
The theoretical implication is fundamental: reproducibility is a composite governance profile,
not a scalar model property.
The profile is not merely prudent. Two results establish that no single within-case statistic can
substitute for it; proofs are in Appendix S2.
Theorem 5 (Range mismatch). Let L = |L| be the number of actions the system is allowed to
take, m the number of model calls in one decision, and ¯p < 1 an upper bound on the probability
that any single call repeats its own output. Then RO ≥ 1/L always, whereas RT ≤ ¯pm → 0
and, by Theorem 1, I(C;Y) → 0 geometrically in depth. As depth grows, the attainable region
of (RT,I(C;Y),RO) therefore approaches {0} × {0} × [1/L,1]: the process record and the case
information are driven to zero while the outcome metric remains bounded away from zero.
In plain terms: the process record can fall to nothing while the outcome metric stays high. This
is stronger than saying outcome agreement can mislead: the metric is bounded below by 1/L on a
scale whose failure mode lies at zero, so its range does not contain the failure it is being used to
exclude.
Corollary 4 (No threshold on RO is a sufficient audit criterion). For any rule of the form “authorize
while RO ≥ τ” there exist configurations that satisfy it with RT = 0 and I(C;Y ) = 0. The constant
policy Y ≡ ℓ0 attains RO = 1 with I(C;Y) = 0.
Theorem 6 (Degeneracy is not identifiable within cases). Let A return the case-appropriate action
ℓ⋆(c) with probability one, and let B return a fixed ℓ0 with probability one. Both induce a point
mass verdict distribution for every case. Every statistic that is a function of the within-case verdict
distributions alone therefore takes the same value under A and B, for every number of repetitions
K.
In plain terms: a system that always answers correctly and a system that always answers the same
thing look identical if you only ever re-run one case.
Corollary 5. Separating A from B requires at least two cases whose correct actions differ, and a
statistic comparing modal verdicts across those cases. Decision families with differentiated correct
actions, together with DV , constitute the minimal design that identifies degeneracy.
24
Remark 2. RO is a functional of the within-case distributions; DV and I(C;Y ) are functionals of
the cross-case distribution of modal verdicts. RO is not a function of DV , and no claim here asserts
otherwise. Theorem 6 states why the second family is not redundant: the first is blind to degeneracy
by construction, at any sample size.
7.2 Experimental Design and Identification Strategy
Studies 1 and 2 share a common test bed of 32 constructed financial cases (eight each in credit,
trading, AML, and portfolio rebalancing). Within each case, the financial objective, facts, instruc
tions, and allowable actions are fixed. The design isolates specific governance mechanisms that can
erode reproducibility; it does not estimate average prevalence across the financial sector.
Release-timeline arm: changing the object of audit. This arm tests whether a current provider
release reproduces actions generated by an earlier release. We execute the 32 cases across four dated
releases of Anthropic’s Claude Opus line over 185 days (three repetitions per cell). The releases are
claude-opus-4-5 (24 November 2025), claude-opus-4-6 (4 February 2026), claude-opus-4-7 (14
April 2026), and claude-opus-4-8 (28 May 2026). Comparing later modal verdicts to the earliest
release baseline yields baseline-modal historical fidelity, RH(t). This design captures the effect that
an institution encounters when a provider updates the system. Such an update may bundle changes
to model behavior, capabilities, and infrastructure. We do not attribute an observed verdict shift
to any particular undocumented internal change.
Decoding-control arm: changing the means of replay. This arm isolates the execution controls
required for stable replay. Two provider-exposed settings govern that capability. Temperature scales
how much randomness the system is permitted when it selects each successive word. At zero it
always takes its single most likely continuation. The same input then tends to return the same text.
As temperature rises, the same input can return different text on each execution. A random seed
fixes the draw used when that randomness is exercised, so that a repeated run samples identically.
Neither setting is the institution’s to keep. Both are exposed, or withdrawn, by the provider. We
use a fixed, locally served llama3.2:3b model. We examine four conditions: (1) temperature zero,
fixed seed; (2) temperature zero, varied seed; (3) no temperature sent, varied seed; and (4) neither
sent. The first condition is an implementation check; the main-text comparison reports the three
conditions that do not fix the seed. Comparing Conditions 2 and 3 isolates the loss of temperature
control while seed availability is retained; comparing Conditions 3 and 4 identifies the additional
loss associated with seed unavailability. Because the executable is fixed, this arm measures current
outcome reproducibility, RO(t).
Execution-environment arm: changing where the same call runs. This arm holds the cases, the
prompts, the model version, and the decoding settings fixed, and varies only whether execution
occurs on a locally served model or on Anthropic’s hosted Claude endpoint. Ten repetitions per
case are executed in a single session, so no release change can intervene. The arm measures RO
under the most favorable replay conditions an institution can arrange.
Orchestration arm: changing the governance architecture. Study 2 isolates the decision topology
by sweeping configurations from one to fifty agents. The multi-agent setup strictly separates infor
mation access, analysis, and authority (Figure 5). Upstream specialists pass intermediate reports
along a fixed graph, and only a terminal Decider issues the final verdict. Every intermediate record
is retained. This allows us to locate the first observed divergence and trace how it propagates. The
design yields current outcome reproducibility RO(t), exact trace reproducibility RT(t), and verdict
differentiation DV (t).
Adding agents widens the graph more than it lengthens it, and the distinction matters for
the theory. Every layer holds three specialists, each reading two reports from the layer above, so
25
a configuration of fifty specialists is 52 nodes arranged in 19 sequential stages (Figure 6). The
exponent in the contraction bound of Theorem 1 is the number of sequential stages. For the largest
configuration that exponent is 19, not 50. We report agent counts on the horizontal axis of every
sweep figure because that is the quantity a firm chooses; the corresponding stage counts are 3, 4, 6,
9, 12, 16, and 19.
CONTROLLED MULTI-AGENT GOVERNANCE TEST
Distributed analysis | terminal decision authority | every output and handoff retained
L1
DIRECT CASE ACCESS
Market
environment signals
CASE
fixed input
Not a model call
Retrieval
facts and numbers
Policy
rules and thresholds
L2
SPECIALIST ANALYSIS
Risk
risk severity
Analyst
threshold assessment
L3
INTEGRATION
L4
CHALLENGE
Quant
score allowed options
AML
L5
financial-crime concerns
Compliance
regulatory concerns
Original case access is restricted to Layer 1
All later nodes receive retained upstream reports only
Each arrow is a retained inter-agent message.
L1-L4: REPORT ONLY- NO ACTION AUTHORITY
Critic
Customer
customer impact
challenge the view
AUTHORIZED ACTION
Decider
one allowed label
L5: DECIDER- ACTION AUTHORITY
Figure 5: Controlled multi-agent governance test. Only Retrieval, Market, and Policy observe the
original financial case; downstream roles observe only the records transmitted along designated
edges. Specialist roles are report-only, and only the terminal Decider can issue the final financial
verdict. Retaining every role output and handoff makes it possible to locate the first observed
divergence and trace how it propagates through the governance chain.
Identification boundary and triangulation. To cleanly isolate orchestration, the communication
graph is fixed ex ante, tool payloads are frozen, and the graph is traversed once without iterative
self-correction.
These four arms are not pooled because they target different evidentiary failures. The re
lease arm changes the executable (RH); the decoding arm narrows the replay controls (RO); the
execution-environment arm moves the same call between local and hosted infrastructure (RO); and
the orchestration arm alters the decision topology (RO, RT, DV ). Their convergence constitutes
mechanism triangulation, not a single pooled treatment effect. Study 3 is analytically separate and
detailed in Section 7.5.
7.3 Study 1: Provider Dominance Over the Governance Environment
Our first study asks whether an institution can preserve historical decision behavior after a provider
changes the system. We examine changes to both the model version and the execution controls
available for replay. The release-timeline test holds 32 financial cases fixed across four dated Claude
Opus releases. A separate decoding-control grid holds the cases and model fixed while varying
temperature and seed availability. A third, paired test holds everything fixed and moves the same
call between local and hosted execution. These tests are not pooled into a single causal estimate.
Instead, they identify three distinct channels through which retained reproducibility depends on a
provider-controlled audit surface.
26
(a)  The 20-agent configuration: 22 nodes, 9 stages
(b)  Adding agents widens more than it deepens
60
width 3, in parallel
case
9 sequential stages  =  the depth k that enters the bound
50
40
decider
30
count
20
10
agents in the system
sequential stages k
the exponent in the contraction
bound is 19, not 50
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
configuration size (specialist agents requested)
Figure 6: Agent count and chain depth are different quantities. (a) The twenty-agent configuration.
Three first-layer specialists read the case; every later specialist reads two reports from the layer above
and never sees the case itself. A critic challenges the emerging view, and only the terminal Decider
issues an action. The graph is three agents wide at every layer, so twenty-two nodes span nine
sequential stages. (b) Across the sweep, node count grows linearly with the configuration size while
the number of sequential stages grows far more slowly. The largest configuration has 52 nodes but
19 stages, and it is the stage count that enters the geometric contraction bound.
7.3.1 Silent Risk Shifts and the Erosion of the Audit Surface
We examine four dated releases of Claude Opus over 185 days. Baseline-modal historical fidelity
( RH) remained perfect (1.000) through the second release. It then dropped to 0.906 in the third and
fourth releases (Figure 7a). In both of these later releases, 29 of the 32 modal decisions matched
the baseline. Across the releases as a whole, however, five distinct cases changed at least once.
Every deviation moved toward a more conservative action. Four trading cases shifted from buy
to hold, and one rebalancing case shifted from rebalance to hold. (Credit and AML cases remained
stable.) This is not merely generic “model drift.” It is a silent shift in the operative risk posture.
Absent release-specific revalidation, an institution can easily continue operating a system whose
behavioral policy has shifted without internal authorization.
Stable aggregate metrics also mask underlying case churn. The fidelity score remained flat at
0.906 across both later releases, yet the specifically affected cases differed. Of the three cases that
diverged from baseline in the third release, one remained changed in the fourth, and two reverted
to baseline. Two entirely different cases then changed for the first time.
A flat aggregate fidelity score therefore fails to identify a stable remediation population. For
governance, this means an institution cannot determine from portfolio-level stability alone which
specific historical decisions require review.
The more consequential finding concerns the audit surface itself. In later releases, Anthropic
withdrew institutional control over temperature—an execution parameter critical for stable replay.
The withdrawal is total rather than partial. A request to claude-opus-5 carrying temperature
returns HTTP 400, “‘temperature‘ is deprecated for this model,” and the same applies to
top_p and top_k. This holds for temperature = 0, the setting an auditor would use. The line
has never exposed a random seed at all. The provider thus altered not only the system being
27
audited, but also the very controls required to conduct the audit. We term this control-surface
dependence: an institution’s retained reproducibility relies on execution controls it does not own
and cannot unilaterally preserve.
A fixed random seed cannot compensate for this missing environment. A seed only constrains
sampling conditional on the exact same model, instructions, tool responses, and upstream state. If
any upstream component changes, the seed applies to a fundamentally different conditioning context
(Figure 7b).
CROSS-VERSION HISTORICAL OUTCOME DRIFT
1.02
1.00
0.98
Baseline-modal historical fidelity
0.96
0.94
0.92
0.90
0.88
0.86
Release 4.5
1.000
Release 4.6
1.000
Release 4.7
0.906
5/5 changed verdicts moved
toward the conservative action
25
0
50
75
100
Days since baseline release
125
(a) Release-timeline drift.
A FIXED SEED CONTROLS SAMPLING, NOT THE ENTIRE EXECUTION CHAIN
RUN A
RUN B
Release 4.8
0.906
150
175
Prompt
Agent 1
Tool
Agent 2
Verdict
Same seed
≠
same decision
Prompt
Agent 1
Tool
Agent 2
Verdict
Different tool/state response
(b) Limits of seed-based replay.
Figure 7: Provider dominance over the audit surface. (a) Baseline-modal historical outcome drift
across four dated Claude Opus releases. The experimental proxy RH remains 1.000 through the
second release, falling to 0.906 in the third and fourth. Every changed verdict moves toward a
more conservative action. Because successive releases also alter capabilities, this captures release
timeline drift rather than silent same-version drift. (b) A fixed seed controls sampling, not the
complete execution chain. It cannot recreate a historical decision if the model state, tool responses,
or intermediate context drift.
A separate controlled experiment isolates these execution controls directly. With temperature
pinned to zero, both one- and ten-agent configurations achieved perfect current outcome repro
ducibility (RO) across varied seeds. Removing the temperature control reduced reproducibility;
removing the seed reduced it further (Table 5). In this setting, temperature was the primary
control for verdict stability, while seed availability provided an additional stabilizing effect once
temperature control was absent. While this experiment and the provider observation use differ
ent model settings, they demonstrate the same theoretical dependency: reproducibility is strictly
bounded by the control surface exposed to the institution.
Table 5: Execution controls and current outcome reproducibility. Same model, same 32 cases, and
five repetitions per case; entries are verdict-level estimates of RO.
Temperature Seed
1 agent 10 agents
Pinned to 0
Not sent
Not sent
Varied
Varied
Not sent
1.000
0.912
0.831
1.000
0.794
0.744
7.3.2 Pinned Controls Restore Reproducibility Locally but Not on a Hosted Endpoint
Table 5 invites an obvious remedy: pin temperature to zero, freeze the model version, and the
problem appears to dissolve. Three paired arms show that this remedy works on a locally served
model, fails on a hosted one, and is not even available on a frontier one. We first executed the
28
same 32 cases ten times each at temperature zero against two execution environments. The first
is the locally served llama3.2:3b used elsewhere in Study 1. The second is Anthropic’s hosted
endpoint running claude-haiku-4-5-20251001, pinned to that dated release. Stimuli, prompts,
and decoding settings were identical across arms. Only the execution environment differed.
The local arm reproduced itself exactly, returning the modal verdict in all 320 executions. The
hosted arm returned it in 319 (Table 6). The single deviation fell on a borderline credit case with a
subprime credit score, a debt-to-income ratio of 47 percent, and one prior delinquency. Ten identical
executions returned deny nine times and refer once.
A third arm removes the remaining controls entirely. On claude-opus-5 the institution cannot
pin temperature, cannot pin a dated release, and has never had a seed, so the tightest available
configuration is simply the provider default. We executed the same 32 cases 30 times each in a single
session, 960 executions. The modal verdict returned in 959. The deviation is instructive, because it
did not fall on a marginal application. The case carries a credit score of 754, a debt-to-income ratio
of 31 percent, and an income roughly five times the amount requested, against one delinquency in
24 months. Twenty-nine executions approved it. One referred it to a human underwriter, reasoning
that “the recent 24-month delinquency warrants human review of its severity and cause,” where
the other twenty-nine had reasoned that ample income “outweighs the single isolated delinquency.”
The irreproducibility is therefore not noise that a filter could remove. It is a defensible alternative
judgment on identical facts, surfacing at random.
Table 6: Within-session reproducibility under the tightest replay controls each endpoint exposes.
Same 32 cases and identical prompts throughout; the arms differ in the controls available, not in
the stimulus. The commercial models offer an optional internal deliberation step before answering;
it is switched off here, so all three arms answer directly, as the local model does.
Environment
Model
Replay controls exposed
Modal
Cases
verdict differing
Local, single
stream
Hosted, shared
Hosted, shared
llama3.2:3b
claude-haiku-4-5
claude-opus-5
temperature 0; version pinned 320 / 320
temperature 0; dated release
none: provider default,
undated alias
319 / 320
959 / 960
0 / 32
1 / 32
1 / 32
We report these as counterexamples and not as estimates. One deviating execution does not
support a rate, and a difference of one case in 32 is not distinguishable from chance on this sample.
The three arms also differ in repetition count and in the controls available, so their execution-level
figures are not three measurements of one quantity. What the deviations establish is narrower and
sufficient: reproducibility is not guaranteed on a hosted endpoint, either when every exposed control
is pinned or when no control is exposed at all. The paired local control shows that the failure is not
a general property of language models, since the identical protocol reproduced perfectly on local
execution. Both hosted deviations landed on credit cases, and both moved toward refer, the action
that transfers the decision to a human. Control-surface dependence therefore does not end when the
institution pins every setting the provider exposes. Some of the variation that governs a financial
action lives in execution infrastructure that exposes no control at all.
7.4 Study 2: Orchestration, Serial Dependence, and Output Collapse
The second study holds the locally served model, the thirty-two financial cases, frozen tool payloads,
and observed execution settings fixed. It changes only the agentic architecture. The one-versus-ten
29
agent comparison isolates the initial move from a single call to a serial pipeline. The one-to-fifty
agent sweep then tests three possibilities: monotonic decay, trace instability, or apparent recovery
through output collapse. We measure current outcome reproducibility, exact trace identity, and
verdict differentiation separately.
7.4.1 Architecture Is Policy: Orchestration Changes Decisions Even When Each Ar
chitecture Is Reproducible
We changed only the orchestration, moving from one call to the multi-agent pipeline. Mean current
outcome reproducibility fell from 0.903 to 0.747 (Figure 8a). The family-level pattern is more
revealing than the mean. Credit, trading, and rebalancing became less reproducible, whereas AML
rose from 0.850 to 0.988 because the multi-agent system nearly always escalated the case. Constant
action increased the metric.
Orchestration also changed the decisions themselves. In the temperature-zero condition, both
architectures were perfectly reproducible within their own execution environments, yet their modal
verdicts matched on only 16 of 32 cases. Thus, perfect within-system reproducibility does not imply
policy invariance across architectures. Agent roles, topology, aggregation, and the information
supplied to the terminal Decider are not neutral implementation details. They form a latent policy
layer that can alter the institution’s operative risk posture without an explicit policy decision.
The designed roster partly conditions the direction of this shift. The evidence therefore supports
a structural effect of architecture, not a universal claim that multi-agent systems always become
more conservative.
7.4.2 Trace–Outcome Decoupling: The Verdict Can Reproduce While the Recorded
Path Changes
Outcome agreement also overstates the stability of the supporting record. In the multi-agent condi
tion, the recorded output at every stage differed across repeated executions in all 32 cases, beginning
with the first-layer retrieval record. The final verdict differed in only 25 of 32 cases (Figure 8b).
Downstream agents therefore absorbed or compressed some upstream variation before it reached
the final action. The organization can observe a stable verdict even though the recorded path to
that verdict is nonidentical.
This pattern also rejects a naive independent-compounding interpretation. Variation enters
early, is transformed through causally dependent handoffs, and is often compressed by the terminal
categorical decision. The experiment directly establishes exact trace nonidentity, not that every
linguistic difference is materially non-equivalent under every evidentiary standard. Its governance
implication is nevertheless decisive: terminal verdict agreement cannot be used as proof that the
material process has been reproduced. That inference requires a separate RP(t;σ) test.
7.4.3 Degenerate Outcome Reproducibility: A System Can Look More Stable Because
It Has Stopped Distinguishing Cases
Scaling the system from one up to fifty agents reveals a stark, non-monotonic pattern (Figure 9).
Current outcome reproducibility (RO) drops sharply from 0.912 at one agent to 0.750 at five agents,
before fluctuating between 0.750 and 0.875.
This apparent recovery at larger scales is an illusion. It is not accompanied by a stable process
record. Across all seven architectural configurations and 1,120 total executions, not a single case
produced an exactly identical full set of agent outputs (Table 7).
30
ORCHESTRATION CHANGES OUTCOME REPRODUCIBILITY AND DECISIONS
1 agent  (mean 0.903) 10 agents (mean 0.747)
Constant escalation
raises reproducibility
0.912
1.0
0.988
0.850
1.000
0.850
Current outcome reproducibility
0.8
0.700
0.675
0.625
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Trade
Credit
Rebalancing
AML
(a) Architecture-level reproducibility.
THE OUTCOME MAY REPRODUCE WHILE THE RECORDED TRACE CHANGES
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
Share of cases with divergence
0.2
Trace differs in 32/32 cases
Final verdict differs in 25/32 cases
0.0
(b) Trace–outcome decoupling.
Figure 8: Orchestration changes both the decisions being reproduced and the records supporting
them. (a) Mean RO falls from 0.903 in the one-agent configuration to 0.747 in the ten-agent
configuration. AML moves in the opposite direction because near-constant escalation makes the
final verdict artificially easy to reproduce. (b) Recorded traces differ in all 32 cases and at every
stage, while the final verdict differs in only 25 of 32 cases. The comparison establishes exact trace
nonidentity; establishing material process equivalence requires a separate evidentiary test under ≡σ.
Instead, the recovery stems from a severe collapse in verdict differentiation. At one agent, the
eight AML cases cleanly split into three clear and five escalate decisions. By forty agents, the system
blanket-escalated all eight. The credit family degraded similarly, shifting from a differentiated split
(seven approve, one deny) to near-uniformity (seven deny, one refer). At forty agents, three of the
four case families applied the exact same blanket verdict to all eight of their underlying cases.
The normalized within-family verdict spread (DV ) plummeted to 0.086 at forty agents and flat
lined there. The share of decisions that both successfully reproduced and meaningfully distinguished
between cases collapsed from 30% at one agent to just 7% at fifty agents.
We term this degenerate outcome reproducibility. The metric RO superficially improves only
because the system’s action distribution collapses into blanket defaults. If a firm monitors outcome
reproducibility in isolation, it might perversely rank the fifty-agent pipeline above the ten-agent one.
It would systematically reward a credit model for blanket denials or an AML system for universal
escalation. The metric falsely signals robust auditability at the exact moment the system loses the
core discriminatory capability it was authorized to exercise.
Why the apparent recovery occurs. The mechanism starts with the base model, not orchestration.
The sweep used an environment in which temperature was not supplied and seeds varied. Even the
single-agent llama3.2:3b benchmark failed exact trace replay (0/32 matches) and yielded an RO
of 0.912. The base LLM injects textual variation before any inter-agent handoff occurs. Pinning
temperature to zero restored perfect verdict reproduction at this model scale. That restoration is
scale-dependent, and it should not be read as a general property of the control. Replicating the same
arm on llama3.1:8b leaves current outcome reproducibility short of one at ten agents. Pairwise
trace identity in that configuration is .45 on llama3.1:8b, against .94 on llama3.2:3b under the
identical condition (Table S3). The control that looked sufficient at 3B is only partially effective at
8B.
The non-monotonic curve is therefore not a contest between two forces. One of the two is already
saturated before the sweep begins. Exact trace reproducibility is zero in every configuration and
at both model scales, the single-call configuration included. No case repeated its full record even
Retrieve
Risk
Quant
Market
Compliance
Policy
Customer
Critic
Synthesis
Decision
Record
31
Table 7: Agent count, current outcome reproducibility, exact record identity, and verdict differenti
ation. Every configuration uses the same locally served llama3.2:3b model on the same machine,
the same 32 cases, and five repetitions per case; temperature is not supplied and seeds vary across
repetitions. The one-agent row is therefore the reproducibility benchmark of the underlying LLM
under the same execution condition, rather than a different control arm. Exact graph structure and
call accounting for each scale are generated from the replication configuration files.
Agents
RO Exact record Cases with a DV
identity
verdict split
1 0.912
5 0.750
10 0.794
20 0.869
30 0.800
40 0.875
50 0.850
0/32
0/32
0/32
0/32
0/32
0/32
0/32
13/32 0.324
25/32 0.336
21/32 0.367
13/32 0.264
21/32 0.286
14/32 0.086
18/32 0.086
REPRODUCTION DROPS ONCE; LATER RECOVERY COINCIDES WITH OUTPUT COLLAPSE
Observed verdict fidelity
1.0
Naive independent-call product Within-family verdict spread
Apparent recovery
RO=0.875
0.8
0.6
Rate
0.4
0.2
0.0
OUTPUT COLLAPSE
Verdict differentiation
collapses to DV=0.086
1
5
10
20
30
Number of agents
40
50
Figure 9: Why outcome reproducibility can recover while the underlying process remains nonre
producible. The same locally served llama3.2:3b model is used throughout. Moving from one to
multiple agents initially adds opportunities for variable LLM outputs to enter the execution trace,
reducing RO. At larger scales, repeated summarization and the final categorical decision bottleneck
map increasingly nonidentical traces onto a narrow set of default actions; RO therefore partially
recovers as DV collapses. The dashed benchmark assumes that call-level differences propagate in
dependently to the verdict and thus misses this many-to-one compression mechanism.
once, in 1,120 executions per model. Stochastic expansion — the accumulation of textual variation
across added calls — therefore has no room left to operate on this metric. It reached its floor at
one agent.
What remains is categorical compression, and it accounts for the entire curve. With RT = 0,
Lemma 1(ii) makes the outcome metric equal the compression probability exactly. Every movement
in RO across the sweep is therefore movement in κ. A serial pipeline is not simply an independent
product of call-level error rates. Downstream agents repeatedly summarize nonidentical upstream
32
text, and the final Decider maps a high-dimensional execution trace into a low-dimensional action
space. This process absorbs immaterial wording differences, preventing multiplicative decay. How
ever, at extreme scales, absorption becomes overcompression. The system erases vital case facts
needed to distinguish materially different cases. Our roster explicitly surfaces risk and compli
ance concerns. Consequently, conservative defaults such as deny or escalate become the dominant
absorption states.
The mechanism replicates at a larger scale, attenuated. The mechanism holds at a larger scale. We
repeated the full sweep on llama3.1:8b: same code, same thirty-two frozen cases, same seeds, same
seven configurations, 1,120 executions. Figure 10 places the two scales side by side. Three things
recur exactly. Exact trace identity is zero in every configuration. The local maximum of RO falls
at forty agents in both. The collapse in verdict differentiation falls at forty agents in both.
The magnitudes differ, and in the direction that matters for governance. At forty agents the
eight-billion-parameter model retains 2.5 times the differentiation of the three-billion-parameter one
(DV = 0.214 versus 0.086), so it does not enter the range in which a decision family has stopped
distinguishing its cases. It nevertheless loses 59% of its own differentiation there, and its outcome
reproducibility is lower than the smaller model’s at every configuration beyond ten agents. Between
these two local models, scale moderates degeneracy without removing it.
A frontier model reproduces its actions better and its record no better. We extended the comparison
to a commercial frontier model. Three configurations—one, ten, and forty agents—were executed
on claude-sonnet-5 with three repetitions per case, 5,310 calls in total. The provider does not
disclose a parameter count. The system is a commercial model at the top of its provider’s range,
and we take it to exceed 1011 parameters, at least an order of magnitude beyond either local model.
Nothing below depends on the exact figure. Because this arm uses three repetitions, we recompute
the local results on their first three repetitions, so every comparison is at matched k.
Three results follow, and they do not point the same way. First, exact trace reproducibility
is zero in every configuration for this model as well. No execution record repeated itself, at any
scale tested. Second, outcome reproducibility is higher than the eight-billion-parameter model’s,
not lower: 0.958, 0.958 and 0.938 against 0.844, 0.802 and 0.802. The advantage holds case by case,
not merely on average (sign tests over the 32 matched cases: p = .007 at one agent, p < .001 at
ten, p = .004 at forty). Third, verdict differentiation starts far higher and falls further. It begins
at DV = 0.749, more than double either local model, and reaches 0.239 at forty agents, a loss of
68%. Because only three configurations were executed for this model, that loss is measured from
the largest value observed among them and is therefore a lower bound.
These results revise an earlier generalization rather than the theory. The contraction bound of
Theorem 1 is stated in sequential stages, not in model size, and it never predicted that outcome
reproducibility would fall with capability. What the frontier model demonstrates is a separation.
It reproduces its own actions more often than a small local model. It does not reproduce its own
record any more often, since that quantity is zero at every scale. It does not retain more of its
differentiation under orchestration, since it loses a comparable share. Capability purchases a higher
starting point. It does not purchase auditability.
Two cautions bound these comparisons. The three endpoints do not share a decoding condition,
because temperature is settable on the local models and rejected by the commercial endpoint, so
part of the outcome-reproducibility difference may reflect default sampling rather than capability.
And DV is unstable at these sample sizes: recomputing the eight-billion-parameter model on three
repetitions moves its forty-agent value from 0.214 to 0.414. We therefore report change within a
model, which is stable, and avoid ranking models against one another at a single configuration.
The serial system appears to outperform the naive independent-call product for a perverse
33
(a)  Both scales rebound at forty agents
(b)  Differentiation collapses at both, unequally
0.6
0.95
current outcome reproducibility  RO
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70 llama3.2:3b
llama3.1:8b
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
verdict differentiation  DV
0.1
at forty agents the larger model retains 2.5× the differentiation, and still falls
cases no longer told apart
1
5
10
20
30
agents in the pipeline
40
50
0.0
1
5
10
20
agents in the pipeline
30
40
50
Figure 10: The same sweep at two model scales. (a) Current outcome reproducibility. Both scales
fall, then recover at forty agents; the larger model is lower throughout beyond ten agents. (b)
Verdict differentiation. Both collapse at forty agents. The smaller model enters the range in which
cases within a decision family are no longer told apart; the larger model retains 2.5 times the
differentiation and stays above it, while still losing most of its own. Exact trace reproducibility is
zero at every point on both curves, so by Lemma 1(ii) panel (a) is the compression probability κ
throughout.
reason. It maps wildly divergent decision paths to the exact same terminal action. Let Tn,r denote
the complete trace produced in repetition r of an n-agent configuration, and let Yn,r = gn(Tn,r)
denote the final verdict. The system falls into degenerate reproducibility when:
Tn,r ̸ = Tn,r′
but
gn(Tn,r) = gn(Tn,r′) = y†,
(21)
for a growing share of cases, where y† is a blanket default action. The exact same information
loss that prevents multiplicative decay drives DV toward zero, creating the mathematical illusion
of a highly reproducible system.
7.5 Study 3: A Reproducible Credit Model Can Still Fail to Reproduce History
The earlier release study produced no verdict changes among its constructed credit cases. That
null result is specific to those cases and releases; it should not be mistaken for immunity of credit
decisions to historical- verification failure. To demonstrate the mechanism directly in a stable credit
setting, we conduct a preserved-version experiment using public data and fixed decision thresholds.
By separating this numerical test from the multi-agent pipelines, we remove generative stochasticity
and inter-agent orchestration as necessary explanations for the result.
Because both model versions are preserved in the experiment, the design also distinguishes
the failure condition from its governance remedy. Replaying the current version against a decision
produced by the historical version tests historical fidelity. Replaying the preserved historical version
tests whether retaining the original executable restores the capacity to reproduce and substantiate
the decision.
Design, data, and decision rule. We use the public FICO Home Equity Line of Credit (HELOC)
challenge dataset [FICO, 2018]. To keep explainability directly testable, we fit standardized logistic
34
models using five core credit-report variables, yielding 9,682 complete records. We fit version 1 (v1)
on 5,808 records. We then fit version 2 (v2) on an expanded estimation set. That set includes the
original 5,808 records and 1,937 additional records. Both versions use the same variables, model
architecture, estimation code, and decision rule. We evaluate both versions on the same strict
1,937-record holdout.
The models estimate the probability of adverse credit performance, denoted p. The illustrative
policy approves cases when p < .45, refers cases for substantive human review when .45 ≤ p < .55,
and denies cases when p ≥ .55. These thresholds are chosen to expose the verification mechanism,
not to prescribe an underwriting policy.
Aggregate validation masks changed financial actions. At the portfolio level, the two versions appear
nearly identical: AUCv1 
= .7901 and AUCv2 
= .7899. Yet AUC and historical action fidelity
evaluate different objects. AUC is a threshold-independent measure of how well a model ranks
cases. A financial action is a threshold-dependent, case-specific consequence of that score. A model
refresh can therefore preserve nearly the same overall ranking while moving individual cases near a
policy boundary from one action category to another.
That is precisely what occurs. Although aggregate discrimination is virtually unchanged, 23 of
the 1,937 held-out policy actions change after the refresh, yielding held-out historical fidelity of
RH(v2 ← v1) = 1,914
1,937 = .9881.
(22)
The result is not a contradiction. The refresh changes little about aggregate ranking perfor
mance, but small score movements become financially consequential when they cross a discrete
policy threshold. Similar aggregate performance therefore does not guarantee historical action fi
delity.
The decision-level verification gap. Consider source-row index 2270, one of the 23 discordant cases,
selected to make the threshold-crossing mechanism directly observable. Version v1 estimates p =
.5580 and denies the application. Version v2 estimates p = .5488 and refers the same application.
The score changes by only .0092, but that movement crosses the fixed denial threshold and changes
the financial action.
Across ten repeated executions, each frozen version perfectly returns its own version-specific
score and action. Thus:
RO(v1) = RO(v2) = 1,
RH(case 2270) = 0.
(23)
Equation 23 captures the central separation. Current outcome reproducibility is a within-version
property: it asks whether the same frozen executable returns the same action again. Historical
fidelity is a cross-version property: it asks whether the current executable reproduces the action
taken by the historical executable. Repeated execution of v2 perfectly reproduces the current
referral, but it never recovers the historical v1 denial. Perfect current reproducibility can therefore
coexist with complete historical-fidelity failure at the decision level.
Position, not magnitude, decides which actions change. Case 2270 is representative rather than
exceptional. An action can change only when the score movement |∆p| exceeds the distance from
the historical score to the nearest policy cutoff. All 23 discordant cases lie above that boundary and
none falls below it, as panel (a) of Figure 11 shows. The condition is necessary but not sufficient,
because a score can also move away from a cutoff rather than across it. The score movements
themselves are unremarkable. Their median is .0088, only 2.6 times the .0034 median across all
held-out cases. What sets the 23 apart is where they started. Every one begins within .0161 of a
35
cutoff, the6.9thpercentileof theheld-outdistancedistribution. Thefindingisnotanartifactof
the .45and.55cutoffs. Acrossthe39admissiblecutoffpairsona.05grid, everypairchangesat
least14held-outactions,withamedianof21,aspanel(b)reports.
0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05
distance from the historical score to the nearest policy cutoff
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
size of the score movement  | p|
movement exceeds
the distance
1,914 unchanged
(a)  Position beats magnitude
0.35 0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75
upper cutoff (refer  deny)
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
lower cutoff (approve  refer)
19 17 20 24 21 24 17 19 15
18 21 25 22 25 18 20 16
19 23 20 23 16 18 14
26 23 26 19 21 17
27 30 23 25 21
27 20 22 18
All 39 of 39 admissible cutoff pairs change at least 14 held-out actions.
(b)  Every cutoff pair changes actions
Figure11:Whatmakesafinancialactionchangeunderamodelrefresh. (a)Eachheld-outapplica
tionisplottedbyitsdistancetothenearestpolicycutoffunderv1(horizontal)againstthesizeofits
scoremovementunderv2(vertical).The23applicationswhoseactionchanges(circles)all lieabove
thediagonal;the1,914unchangedapplications(gray)areconcentratedbelowit.Thechangedcases
aredistinguishedbyproximitytoacutoff,notbyunusuallylargescoremovements. (b)Numberof
held-outactionsthatchange, foreveryadmissiblepairofpolicycutoffsona.05grid.All39pairs
produceat least14changedactions. Thepairusedinthisstudy(outlined)produces23, closeto
thegridmedianof21.
Faithfulnessrequires thehistorical executable. Forthehistorical v1denial, three factorsmakethe
largestadverselocalcontributions.Theyarethepercentageoftradesneverdelinquent,thenumber
ofsatisfactorytrades,andtheexternal riskestimate.Weinterveneonthepreservedv1executable
whileholdingallother inputsfixed. Improvingeachof thesethreefactors independentlylowersp
below.55andshiftstheactionfromdenytorefer,exactlyasthestatedreasonspredict.
Theseprobesdemonstrateintervention-basedfaithfulnessforthev1decision.Thestatedreasons
aremorethanplausibledescriptionsofthedenial.Wheneachreportedfactorchangesinthefavor
abledirection, thepreservedexecutable’sscoreandactionalsochange inthepredicteddirection.
Theirevidentiaryvalueisthereforeversion-specific.
Areasonstatementreconstructedfromv2couldbefullyfaithfultothecurrentreferralandstill
failtosubstantiatethehistoricaldenial. Itwoulddescribethedecisionfunctioncurrentlyavailable,
notthefunctionthatactuallyexercisedauthorityatt0.Historicalexplainabilityisthereforeindexed
tothehistoricalexecutable. Itcannotbeestablishedmerelybygeneratingaplausibleexplanation
fromthecurrentmodel.
Aforeseeable audit exposes the gap. Assume a foreseeable consumer-credit reviewinwhich the
institutionmust substantiatetheprincipal reasonsgivenfor thehistorical adverseaction. If the
institutionretainsonlythefinaldenialnoticewithoutpreservingv1anditsdecision-timeexecution
state,acurrentreplayusingv2willreturnrefer.Arationalereconstructedfromv2mayaccurately
36
describe the current model, but it is evidentially nonresponsive to the historical denial. Historical
reproducibility fails, and the faithfulness of the historical explanation can no longer be validated.
By contrast, the preserved v1 evidence bundle makes historical verification possible. It in
cludes the decision-time inputs, fitted preprocessing state, model parameters, policy thresholds,
and version-specific executable. With this bundle, the institution can reproduce the historical score
and action and perform the faithfulness probes above. The experiment therefore identifies both
sides of the mechanism: current-only retention opens the Verifiability Gap, whereas preservation of
the historical executable restores the verification capacity needed to close it. Table 8 summarizes
the evidence tests, and Figure 12 depicts the resulting decision-level gap.
Table 8: Credit-decision experiment: aggregate stability can conceal decision-level historical-fidelity
failure.
Evidence test
Observed result
Governance implication
Version-level validation
Case-level action
Current reproducibility
Faithfulness probes
Retention condition
AUCv1 
= .7901 and AUCv2 
= .7899; 23
of 1,937 held-out actions change, yielding
RH =.9881.
v1: p = .5580, deny; v2: p = .5488, refer.
A score movement of .0092 crosses the fixed
denial threshold.
Each frozen version returns its own score
and action in 10/10 executions.
Three one-factor interventions on v1 lower
the score below .55 and change deny to refer
exactly as the stated reasons predict.
Current-only replay returns the v2 referral;
replay of the preserved v1 evidence bundle
recovers the historical denial and permits
faithfulness testing.
Stable aggregate discrimination does
not guarantee historical action fidelity.
Small numerical changes can produce
discrete and consequential financial ac
tion changes at policy boundaries.
RO = 1 can coexist with case-level
RH = 0 because current reproducibil
ity and historical fidelity evaluate dif
ferent versions.
Reasons have evidentiary value only
when tested against the executable
that produced the historical action.
Current-only retention opens the Veri
fiability Gap; preserving the historical
executable restores verification capac
ity.
This experiment adds a critical controlled decision-level result to the multi-agent findings. Nei
ther stochastic decoding nor inter-agent propagation is necessary for historical verification to fail.
A deterministic and directly interpretable credit model can remain perfectly reproducible within
each frozen version while a routine model refresh changes the financial action taken on the same
case. At the decision level, RO can equal one while RH equals zero, even when aggregate predictive
performance remains virtually unchanged. The relevant audit object is therefore not merely the
current model. It is the specific historical executable against which the historical action and its
stated reasons can still be tested.
8. Discussion
8.1 Theoretical Contributions
This paper makes three contributions to the IS literature on governing autonomous systems.
Verifiability as authority–evidence alignment. First, we bring explainability and reproducibility into
a single governance construct. Prior IS research has primarily developed the explanatory route
through inscrutability, sociotechnical envelopment, and blackboxing [Berente et al., 2021, Asatiani
et al., 2021, Kronblad et al., 2024]. That work asks whether a responsible party can understand and
37
Credit Experiment: Nearly Unchanged AUC Conceals a Changed Action
Held-out AUC: 0.7901 (v1) vs. 0.7899 (v2)   |   Historical action fidelity RH=0.9881   |   Maximum | p|=0.0324
Case 2270 crosses the denial threshold after the model refresh, while all three historical-executable intervention probes also move the case from deny to refer.
APPROVE
Historical executable v1  |  Case 2270
Current executable v2  |  Same applicant
Faithfulness probe 1  |  Never-delinquent trades: 70%  80%
Faithfulness probe 2  |  Satisfactory trades: 9  15
Faithfulness probe 3  |  External risk estimate: 70  72
REFER / HUMAN REVIEW
RO(v1)=RO(v2)=1 (10/10 each)
RH(case 2270)=0
23 of 1,937 held-out actions changed
p=0.5154   REFER
p=0.5231   REFER
p=0.5210   REFER
DENY
p=0.5580   DENY
p=0.5488   REFER
p= 0.0092
p= 0.0426
p= 0.0349
p= 0.0370 Historical 
v1
Current v
2
v1 intervention probes
0.45
0.47
0.49
0.51
0.53
Predicted probability of bad performance
Decision rule: approve if p<.45; refer if .45 p<.55; deny if p .55.
0.55
0.57
Figure 12: A decision-level Verifiability Gap under current-only retention. Version 1 returns p =
.5580 and denies the application; version 2 returns p = .5488 and refers the same case. The
small score movement crosses the fixed denial threshold. Both frozen versions have perfect current
outcome reproducibility, yet repeated execution of the current version cannot recover the historical
action. Preserving the version 1 executable, decision-time inputs, execution state, policy rule, and
faithfulness probes restores the capacity to reproduce and substantiate the historical denial.
justify why a system acted. We identify a distinct empirical route: whether the relevant decision
and its materially significant process can be reconstructed.
In conventional model governance, weakness in one route could often be partly offset by the other.
Agentic systems weaken both because the operative decision object is distributed across models,
tools, memory states, orchestration, inter-agent handoffs, and provider-controlled infrastructure.
The Verifiability Gap captures the resulting shortfall between the evidence required by delegated
authority and the verification capacity retained after the decision.
Verifiability is therefore not a static property of a model. It is a relation between a decision, a
verifier, an evidentiary standard, and an audit lag, indexed by q = (v,σ,τ). The same decision may
be readily verifiable to an internal engineer immediately after execution but no longer verifiable to
an external regulator eighteen months later. This shifts the unit of analysis from model transparency
to whether the complete decision system preserves sufficient evidence for the authority it exercises.
Reproducibility as a governance profile, not a scalar. Second, we separate the four reproducibil
ity targets rather than reporting one number, and use verdict differentiation to diagnose output
degeneracy:
R(t;σ) = RO(t),RH(t),RP(t;σ),RT(t);DV(t) .
(24)
This profile exposes three forms of false assurance hidden within standard output-agreement
metrics. A current decision may repeat even though the historical action is no longer recoverable
from the current system alone. A final verdict may recur even when its exact recorded execution
path is nonidentical. Exact nonidentity does not by itself establish material nonequivalence. It
nevertheless prevents verdict agreement from serving as proof of process reproduction. Most per
versely, outcome reproducibility may improve because the system collapses toward blanket actions
38
and ceases to distinguish among cases.
These findings revise the expected mechanism of serial agentic failure. Additional calls do not
necessarily produce smooth, independent multiplicative decay. Serial pipelines can instead map
nonidentical upstream states onto the same categorical action, preserving verdict agreement while
leaving process equivalence unestablished. Study 3 extends this distinction to explainability: an
intelligible rationale becomes historical verification evidence only when it behaviorally tracks the
executable that produced the action under review.
Evidence-contingent delegation. Third, we specify when delegated authority remains defensible.
Baird and Maruping [2021] theorize what delegation to an agentic artifact entails. The Verifiability
Gap specifies what must remain true after delegation: an institution should authorize no more
consequential action than it can later substantiate.
Evidence-contingent delegation therefore treats autonomy not as a one-time approval but as a
revocable right tied to retained verification capacity. Provider releases, data refreshes, tool changes,
control-surface changes, and orchestration updates are not merely technical maintenance when they
alter either financial actions or the evidence available to defend them. They are governance events
that may require the institution to strengthen evidence retention, reduce delegated authority, or
both.
8.2 What the Three Studies Establish
Study 1: The institution may control neither the object nor the means of audit. Study 1 shows that
provider-side change can affect both the historical decision object and the controls available for
replay (§7.3). Across four dated releases, identical cases and instructions did not always recover
the baseline modal action. During the same release line, the provider also withdrew a temperature
control relevant to replay. The analytically separate local-control arm shows that the availability of
temperature and seed controls can materially affect current outcome reproducibility.
The two arms do not constitute a single causal estimate. Together, however, they establish
control-surface dependence: retained verification capacity can depend on execution controls that
the deploying institution neither owns nor can unilaterally preserve. A firm may therefore lose both
the historical decision object and part of the means needed to reconstruct it even when the firm
itself changes nothing.
Study 2: Orchestration is a latent policy layer. Study 2 holds the locally served model, cases, and
execution conditions fixed while changing architecture (§7.4). The one- and ten-agent configurations
each achieve perfect current outcome reproducibility under temperature zero, yet their modal actions
match in only 16 of 32 cases. Agent roles, topology, aggregation, and the information supplied to the
final decider form a latent policy layer. Technical reconfiguration can therefore alter the operative
financial decision rule without any explicit change to the stated policy.
The scale sweep identifies a second mechanism. The initial move from one to multiple agents
reduces RO, but its later rebound coincides with a collapse in verdict differentiation. At forty
and fifty agents, DV = 0.086, as the fixed concern-oriented roster increasingly maps different cases
and nonidentical execution records onto a narrow set of conservative actions. Across the seven
architectures, no case achieves exact full-record identity across all repetitions.
This is degenerate outcome reproducibility: apparent outcome stability improves as the system
loses the discriminatory capacity it was authorized to exercise. Exact record nonidentity does not
establish that every textual difference is materially consequential. It does establish that verdict
agreement alone cannot demonstrate process reproduction.
39
Study 3: Perfect current replay does not recover history. Study 3 removes generative sampling and
multi-agent orchestration as necessary explanations (§7.5). The two frozen logistic credit models
share the same architecture, variables, estimation code, and policy thresholds. Their held-out
discrimination is nearly identical: AUCv1 
= .7901 and AUCv2 
= .7899. Each model also perfectly
reproduces its own score and action across repeated executions, yielding RO(v1) = RO(v2) = 1.
Nevertheless, 23 of 1,937 held-out actions change after the model refresh. For case 2270, v1
returns p = .5580 and denies the application, whereas v2 returns p = .5488 and refers it. The small
score movement crosses the fixed policy threshold, producing case-level historical fidelity of RH = 0.
Current reproducibility is therefore a within-version property; historical fidelity is a cross-version
property. Repeated execution of the current version can perfectly reproduce the current referral
while never recovering the historical denial.
The intervention probes provide the complementary explainability result. The three principal
adverse reasons behaviorally track the preserved v1 executable: moving each factor in the favorable
direction changes the historical score and action as predicted. Their evidentiary value is therefore
version-specific. A rationale generated from v2 may faithfully explain the current referral, but it
cannot substantiate the historical v1 denial.
Taken together, the controlled studies establish a stronger claim than “more agents are less
stable.” Current outcome agreement does not establish historical or process verification. An intel
ligible explanation also does not necessarily provide faithful historical evidence. Model-level and
output-level stability metrics can therefore overstate the verification capacity retained for delegated
authority. The studies identify these mechanisms; they do not estimate how frequently the mecha
nisms occur across deployed financial institutions.
8.3 Implications for Agentic AI Governance
Material change should trigger evidence-based reauthorization. A material change should be defined
by its effects on financial behavior or verification capacity, not by whether the institution initiated
it. Changes to models, data, prompts, tools, memory, execution controls, role rosters, topologies,
aggregation rules, or policy thresholds can alter what the system does or whether prior decisions
remain defensible.
After a material change, institutions should replay affected historical cases. They should assess
R(t;σ) by decision family and inspect DV for output collapse. Autonomous action should be reau
thorized only where the retained evidence continues to support it. When verification capacity falls
below the standard required by delegated authority, the institution must respond. It can strengthen
the evidence bundle, reduce autonomous authority, or route affected decisions to substantive human
review.
The relevant record is an executable evidence bundle. Static logs may document what occurred with
out preserving the capacity to reproduce or substantiate it. A defensible evidence bundle connects
all material elements of a decision. The bundle includes decision-time inputs, fitted preprocessing
state, model and component versions, prompts, policy thresholds, tool responses, retrieved docu
ments, memory states, causally material handoffs, and the final action. Standardized documentation
artifacts such as model cards and datasheets establish part of this record, but they describe a com
ponent rather than substantiate a particular decision [Mitchell et al., 2019, Gebru et al., 2018].
Historical reconstruction may also require recorded-environment replay. The system must be
evaluated against the tool responses, retrieved documents, and relevant state available when the
decision was made. The current environment is not necessarily an adequate substitute. Providers
may not retain historical endpoints. Institutions should then seek contractual version retention,
40
model pinning, escrow, or functionally equivalent replay arrangements. These arrangements should
follow foreseeable audit horizons rather than product release cycles.
Explainability controls must attach to the same evidence bundle. Research shows that fluent
reasoning can be unfaithful [Turpin et al., 2023, Lanham et al., 2023]. Study 3 provides a tractable
control prototype: intervene on the factors identified as reasons and test whether the preserved
executable responds as the explanation predicts. For agentic chains, the same logic extends to
materially relevant intermediate states, retrieved evidence, handoffs, and control decisions.
Provenance must compose across boundaries. Per-agent logs do not automatically constitute an
end-to-end evidentiary record. Each causally material handoff should retain a persistent decision
identifier, the sender and recipient, the transferred state, the applicable component version, and
the transformation performed. Existing provenance research records the lineage of digital artifacts
[Singh et al., 2019], while authenticated-delegation schemes can establish agent identity [South
et al., 2025]. Agentic governance additionally requires these records to compose across models,
agents, providers, and firms.
The requirement is not perfect textual reconstruction of every word. It is an evidence chain
sufficient to establish the materially relevant decision process under the applicable verifier and
evidentiary standard.
Missing evidence creates exposure independent of decision quality. A financial decision may be ac
curate and still be difficult to defend when the institution cannot reconstruct the evidence relevant
to its production. Failure to preserve a reconstructable record can therefore create compliance
and model-risk exposure independently of predictive accuracy [Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, 2011].
Missing historical replay can also prevent a firm from bounding remediation. If a fault is dis
covered, the institution may be unable to determine whether the fault affected one decision or an
entire decision population. Dependence on a shared provider adds a network-level exposure: a com
mon provider change may create a correlated auditability shock across institutions even when their
positions and customers differ [Financial Stability Board, 2024, European Central Bank, 2024]. Ver
ifiability therefore affects not only retrospective explanation but also remediation cost, third-party
concentration risk, and the defensibility of continuing autonomous operation.
8.4 Limitations
These studies are controlled mechanism tests rather than sector-wide prevalence estimates.
Study 1 covers one provider release line (Claude Opus), 32 constructed cases, four decision
families, four dated releases, and a 185-day window. The release-timeline arm cannot separate
behavioral drift from simultaneous capability change, identify silent change within a nominally
unchanged version, or determine whether the same pattern generalizes across providers. Historical
fidelity does not decline to one-half during the observation window, so an auditability half-life cannot
yet be estimated.
Study 2 uses two locally served small models and one commercial frontier model whose parameter
count the provider does not disclose, so model scale cannot be treated as a continuous covariate and
is reported as a tier. It uses a researcher-designed serial architecture, a fixed concern-oriented role
roster, frozen tool states, and a single-pass graph. It therefore isolates specialization, causal state
transfer, decoding controls, and orchestration, but not live retrieval, persistent memory, autonomous
goal decomposition, iterative planning, or self-correction. Its categorical actions may also behave
differently from continuous financial decisions such as prices, limits, or position sizes. Exact record
identity is an intentionally stringent diagnostic of textual reproduction; it does not by itself establish
41
material process nonequivalence.
Study 3 uses one public dataset, five selected variables, one transparent logistic model class, one
staged refresh, and illustrative policy thresholds. It is a mechanism test of historical replay and
explanation faithfulness, not a production underwriting policy, fair-lending validation, or estimate of
lender behavior. The detailed intervention analysis centers on a selected denial-to-referral boundary
case. Replication should examine the full population of changed actions and additional datasets,
model classes, policy rules, and refresh events.
The studies also contain no organizational deployment data. They directly identify the material
change mechanism relevant to P4 and provide a bounded operationalization of historical explanation
faithfulness relevant to P5. Study 2 provides a system-internal analogue of the serial evidentiary
dependence in P6, while Study 1 identifies a provider-side antecedent relevant to P7. These studies
do not directly observe several proposed organizational and network mechanisms. They do not
show how firms set autonomy ceilings in P1, compare fault-escape rates across controls in P2, or
estimate the verifiability–efficiency and deskilling effects in P3. Nor do they track evidence custody
across firms in P6 or demonstrate synchronized institutional failure in P7. The empirical findings
should therefore be interpreted as mechanism evidence, not as estimates of organizational or network
outcomes.
8.5 Future Agentic Governance Research
Measure longitudinal verifiability decay. Future studies should estimate how verification capacity
changes over audit lags across multiple providers, model families, decision types, and control sur
faces. They should preserve raw repetitions, record observed material-change events, probe nomi
nally unchanged versions for silent drift, and stratify cases by their distance from policy boundaries.
Such designs could determine whether historical fidelity decays gradually or through discrete losses
of models, controls, data states, and provider support, and could yield context-specific estimates of
auditability half-life.
Separate orchestration from world coupling. Future experiments should vary agent count, causal
depth, topology, role composition, aggregation rules, and decider information independently. They
should then vary live retrieval, tool responses, persistent memory, iterative planning, and self
correction while retaining the historical environment for replay. Such designs would distinguish
instability arising from generation, causal state transfer, world coupling, and categorical compres
sion. They should also extend the analysis from categorical verdicts to continuous financial actions
and develop preregistered standards for materially equivalent, rather than merely textually identical,
execution paths.
Connect explanation faithfulness to human governance. Study 3 provides a tractable intervention
based operationalization of historical faithfulness in a transparent model. The next step is to test
explanations generated by agentic systems against the historical chains that produced their actions.
Behavioral experiments should compare faithful explanations, fluent but unfaithful rationales, action
bounds, decision telemetry, and combinations of these controls.
Relevant outcomes include reviewer fault detection, fault escape, confidence calibration, chal
lenge behavior, review latency, and reliance on automated recommendations. Longitudinal studies
should further examine whether replay and intervention practices preserve reviewer expertise or
whether dependence on agent-generated explanations gradually produces deskilled oversight.
Study organizational and network governance. Field research should examine how model-risk, com
pliance, legal, and business functions set autonomy ceilings. It should also identify when a change
42
to a model, tool, data source, or architecture requires reauthorization. Such work would directly
test P1 and permit estimation of the verifiability–efficiency and deskilling mechanisms in P3.
At the network level, research should trace evidence custody across interorganizational agent
handoffs. It should also test whether provenance standards, contractual replay rights, version reten
tion, escrow, and independent fallbacks reduce correlated auditability shocks from shared providers.
Quantifying the option value of historical replay would further connect the Verifiability Gap to
remediation costs, insurance, capital allocation, contracting, and third-party concentration risk.
Together, these studies would move agentic governance from static model approval toward a lon
gitudinal theory of how authority, evidence, and interorganizational dependence must be governed
together.
9. Conclusion
Agentic AI changes FinTech governance because AI systems no longer merely support financial
judgment; they increasingly coordinate models, tools, data, and other agents to exercise delegated
financial authority. The central governance challenge is therefore not simply whether a model is
accurate or whether a human appears somewhere in the workflow. It is how institutions calibrate
agent authority, preserve evidence of how that authority was exercised, and trigger substantive
human intervention when retained verification capacity no longer supports autonomous action.
We theorize this problem through the Verifiability Gap: the positive shortfall between the veri
fication demanded by delegated authority and the explainability and reproducibility retained after
a decision. We operationalize the construct’s central reproducibility mechanisms. We separate
the four reproducibility targets rather than reporting one number. We also use verdict differen
tiation to diagnose apparent stability produced by output collapse. From this framework follows
evidence-contingent delegation: agentic authority should remain valid only while the institution
retains sufficient evidence to substantiate the decisions made under that authority.
The three studies identify complementary mechanisms through which that condition can fail.
Study 1 shows that provider-side releases can alter historical financial actions while also changing
the control surface available for replay. Study 2 shows that multi-agent orchestration operates
as a latent policy layer. Changes in roles and topology can change financial decisions. Stable
terminal actions can coexist with nonidentical execution records. Outcome reproducibility can also
improve as the system collapses toward blanket defaults. Study 3 shows that even a deterministic
and transparent credit model can perfectly reproduce its current action while failing to reproduce
a historical action. Its intervention probes add the corresponding explainability result. A stated
reason becomes historical verification evidence only when it can be tested against the preserved
executable that produced the decision.
These findings clarify the role of human-in-the-loop governance. Human oversight is not sub
stantive merely because a reviewer approves a final output. A reviewer may receive only a fluent
rationale, a terminal verdict, or a replay from the current model. That evidence may not reveal
that the historical action, decision path, or operative reasons have changed. Meaningful oversight
requires an executable evidence bundle. It must connect decision-time inputs, historical component
versions, relevant execution and memory states, tool responses, causally material handoffs, policy
rules, and final actions. It must also support faithfulness tests that link stated reasons to the
historical decision process.
Human intervention should therefore be evidence-contingent rather than uniformly imposed.
Where retained verification capacity remains commensurate with the authority delegated, au
tonomous execution may continue. A material change may weaken verification capacity by altering
the model, data, tools, control surface, memory, or orchestration. The governance response should
43
then include historical replay, renewed faithfulness testing, tighter action bounds, or substantive hu
man approval. Where the institution can no longer reproduce or explain a decision to the required
standard, delegated authority should contract rather than persist by default.
Our controlled studies identify these mechanisms rather than estimate their prevalence across
deployed financial institutions. Future agentic governance research should address four questions.
How do firms set and revise autonomy thresholds? Which human-review designs reduce fault escape
rather than produce ceremonial approval? Does agent-assisted oversight preserve or erode human
expertise? How can executable evidence and replay rights be maintained across organizational and
provider boundaries?
FinTech agentic AI governance is the dynamic allocation of authority between agents and humans
according to retained verification capacity. Its goal is neither maximum autonomy nor a human
checkpoint attached to every action. It is defensible autonomy. Agents act where their exercise of
authority remains verifiable. Humans intervene where verification capacity falls below the required
standard. Institutions preserve sufficient evidence to substantiate what was done, through what
process, for what reasons, and on what basis.
44
Declarations
Funding. This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commer
cial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Declaration of competing interest. The author declares no competing financial or personal
interests.
Data availability. The code and data reproducing every empirical figure and table are provided
in the accompanying pub-code package and are available at https://anonymous.4open.science/
status/AgenticAI-AEAF. The stored records regenerate every reported statistic offline, without an
API key. Re-executing the hosted arms is a different matter and will not return the same values,
because the endpoints are versioned by the provider and claude-opus-5 is an undated alias; that
limitation is itself one of the findings. The package contains four groups of records. The single
call waves (wave0_*.jsonl) contain 1,600 runs across a local model, a smaller hosted model, and
claude-opus-5. The cross-version study (versions_runs.jsonl) contains 128 runs and uses the
modal verdict over three repetitions per release. The agent experiments are stored in five files.
agents_runs.jsonl contains 640 runs comparing one and ten agents. agents_temp0_runs.jsonl
contains 160 runs that isolate the random seed from temperature. agents_sweep.jsonl contains
1,120 runs across seven agent counts, and llama8b/ contains the 2,560-run replication of those arms
at the larger local scale. agents_sonnet5.jsonl contains the 288 runs of the frontier comparison.
A further file, agents_opus5_pilot.jsonl, holds a 64-run cost-calibration pilot at one repetition; it
supports no reported statistic and is included only for completeness. Every agent’s output is stored
for every run, so the record-reproduction results can be recomputed rather than taken on trust.
The 32 decision cases are constructed rather than drawn from live portfolios and are reconstructible
from code (case-set hash 696afd10); the agent configuration is documented in the Supplemental
Material appended to this article (Section S1).
45
References
Julius Adebayo, Justin Gilmer, Michael Muelly, Ian Goodfellow, Moritz Hardt, and Been Kim.
Sanity Checks for Saliency Maps. arXiv:1810.03292v3, 2018.
Kars Alfrink, Ianus Keller, Gerd Kortuem, and Neelke Doorn. Contestable AI by design: Towards
a framework. Minds and Machines, 33(4):613–639, 2023.
Aleksandre Asatiani, Pekka Malo, Per Rådberg Nagbøl, Esko Penttinen, Tapani Rinta-Kahila, and
Antti Salovaara. Sociotechnical envelopment of artificial intelligence: An approach to organiza
tional deployment of inscrutable artificial intelligence systems. Journal of the Association for
Information Systems, 22(2):325–352, 2021. doi: 10.17705/1jais.00664.
Berk Atıl, Sarp Aykent, Alexa Chittams, Lisheng Fu, Rebecca J. Passonneau, Evan Radcliffe,
Guru Rajan Rajagopal, Adam Sloan, Tomasz Tudrej, Ferhan Ture, Zhe Wu, Lixinyu Xu, and
Breck Baldwin. Non-determinism of “deterministic” LLM system settings in hosted environments.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Evaluation and Comparison of NLP Systems (Eval4NLP),
pages 135–148, 2025. arXiv:2408.04667.
Aaron Baird and Likoebe M. Maruping. The next generation of research on IS use: A theoretical
framework of delegation to and from agentic IS artifacts. MIS Quarterly, 45(1):315–341, 2021.
doi: 10.25300/MISQ/2021/15882.
Robert Bartlett, Adair Morse, Richard Stanton, and Nancy Wallace. Consumer-lending dis
crimination in the FinTech Era. Journal of Financial Economics, 143(1):30–56, 2022. doi:
10.1016/j.jfineco.2021.05.047.
Nicholas Berente, Bin Gu, Jan Recker, and Radhika Santhanam. Managing artificial intelligence.
MIS Quarterly, 45(3):1433–1450, 2021.
Tobias Berg, Valentin Burg, Ana Gombović, and Manju Puri. On the Rise of FinTechs: Credit
Scoring Using Digital Footprints. The Review of Financial Studies, 33(7):2845–2897, 2020. doi:
10.1093/rfs/hhz099.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.
Supervisory guidance on model risk management (SR 11-7). Technical report, Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, 2011.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson,
Shyamal Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon, Niladri Chatterji, Annie Chen, Kathleen Creel,
Jared Quincy Davis, Dora Demszky, Chris Donahue, Moussa Doumbouya, Esin Durmus, Stefano
Ermon, John Etchemendy, Kawin Ethayarajh, Li Fei-Fei, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Gale, Lauren
Gillespie, Karan Goel, Noah Goodman, Shelby Grossman, Neel Guha, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Peter
Henderson, John Hewitt, Daniel E. Ho, Jenny Hong, Kyle Hsu, Jing Huang, Thomas Icard, Saahil
Jain, Dan Jurafsky, Pratyusha Kalluri, Siddharth Karamcheti, Geoff Keeling, Fereshte Khani,
Omar Khattab, Pang Wei Koh, Mark Krass, Ranjay Krishna, Rohith Kuditipudi, Ananya Kumar,
Faisal Ladhak, Mina Lee, Tony Lee, Jure Leskovec, Isabelle Levent, Xiang Lisa Li, Xuechen
Li, Tengyu Ma, Ali Malik, Christopher D. Manning, Suvir Mirchandani, Eric Mitchell, Zanele
Munyikwa, Suraj Nair, Avanika Narayan, Deepak Narayanan, Ben Newman, Allen Nie, Juan
Carlos Niebles, Hamed Nilforoshan, Julian Nyarko, Giray Ogut, Laurel Orr, Isabel Papadimitriou,
46
Joon Sung Park, Chris Piech, Eva Portelance, Christopher Potts, Aditi Raghunathan, Rob Reich,
Hongyu Ren, Frieda Rong, Yusuf Roohani, Camilo Ruiz, Jack Ryan, Christopher Ré, Dorsa
Sadigh, Shiori Sagawa, Keshav Santhanam, Andy Shih, Krishnan Srinivasan, Alex Tamkin, Rohan
Taori, Armin W. Thomas, Florian Tramèr, Rose E. Wang, William Wang, Bohan Wu, Jiajun Wu,
Yuhuai Wu, Sang Michael Xie, Michihiro Yasunaga, Jiaxuan You, Matei Zaharia, Michael Zhang,
Tianyi Zhang, Xikun Zhang, Yuhui Zhang, Lucia Zheng, Kaitlyn Zhou, and Percy Liang. On the
Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models. arXiv:2108.07258v3, 2021.
Xavier Bouthillier, Pierre Delaunay, Mirko Bronzi, Assya Trofimov, Brennan Nichyporuk, Justin
Szeto, Naz Sepah, Edward Raff, Kanika Madan, Vikram Voleti, Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, Vin
cent Michalski, Dmitriy Serdyuk, Tal Arbel, Chris Pal, Gaël Varoquaux, and Pascal Vincent.
Accounting for Variance in Machine Learning Benchmarks. arXiv:2103.03098v1, 2021.
Laura B. Cardinal, Sim B. Sitkin, and Chris P. Long. Balancing and Rebalancing in the Creation
and Evolution of Organizational Control. Organization Science, 15(4):411–431, 2004. doi: 10.
1287/orsc.1040.0084.
Alan Chan, Rebecca Salganik, Alva Markelius, Chris Pang, Nitarshan Rajkumar, Dmitrii
Krasheninnikov, Lauro Langosco, Zhonghao He, Yawen Duan, Micah Carroll, Michelle Lin, Alex
Mayhew, Katherine Collins, Maryam Molamohammadi, John Burden, Wanru Zhao, Shalaleh
Rismani, Konstantinos Voudouris, Umang Bhatt, Adrian Weller, David Krueger, and Tegan Ma
haraj. Harms from Increasingly Agentic Algorithmic Systems. In 2023 ACM Conference on
Fairness Accountability and Transparency, pages 651–666, 2023. doi: 10.1145/3593013.3594033.
Jennifer Cobbe, Michelle Seng Ah Lee, and Jatinder Singh. Reviewable Automated Decision
Making: A Framework for Accountable Algorithmic Systems. arXiv:2102.04201v2, 2021.
Nicholas Diakopoulos. Accountability in algorithmic decision making. Communications of the ACM,
59(2):56–62, 2016. doi: 10.1145/2844110.
Finale Doshi-Velez and Been Kim. Towards A Rigorous Science of Interpretable Machine Learning.
arXiv:1702.08608v2, 2017.
European Central Bank. The rise of artificial intelligence: Benefits and risks for financial stability.
Technical report, Financial Stability Review, Special Feature, May 2024.
European Parliament and Council. Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 laying down harmonised rules on
artificial intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act). Official Journal of the European Union, L series,
12 July 2024.
Samer Faraj, Stella Pachidi, and Karla Sayegh. Working and organizing in the age of the learning
algorithm. Information and Organization, 28(1):62–70, 2018. doi: 10.1016/j.infoandorg.2018.02.
005.
FICO. Explainable machine learning challenge: Home equity line of credit (HELOC) dataset.
Dataset and challenge documentation, 2018.
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority. Emerging trend in GenAI: Observations on AI agents.
FINRA, January 27, 2026.
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority. Regulatory Notice 24-09: FINRA reminds members of
regulatory obligations when using generative artificial intelligence and large language models.
Technical report, FINRA, 2024.
47
Financial Stability Board. The financial stability implications of artificial intelligence. Technical
report, Financial Stability Board, November 2024.
Andreas Fügener, Jörn Grahl, Alok Gupta, and Wolfgang Ketter. Will humans-in-the-loop become
borgs? Merits and pitfalls of working with AI. MIS Quarterly, 45(3):1527–1556, 2021.
Andreas Fuster, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Tarun Ramadorai, and Ansgar Walther. Predictably
unequal? the effects of machine learning on credit markets. Journal of Finance, 77(1):5–47, 2022.
Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach,
Hal Daumé, and Kate Crawford. Datasheets for Datasets. arXiv:1803.09010v8, 2018.
Kate Goddard, Abdul Roudsari, and Jeremy C. Wyatt. Automation bias: A systematic review
of frequency, effect mediators, and mitigators. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association, 19(1):121–127, 2012.
Itay Goldstein, Wei Jiang, and G Andrew Karolyi. To FinTech and Beyond. The Review of Financial
Studies, 32(5):1647–1661, 2019. doi: 10.1093/rfs/hhz025.
Ben Green and Yiling Chen. The Principles and Limits of Algorithm-in-the-Loop Decision Making.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 3(CSCW):1–24, 2019. doi: 10.1145/
3359152.
Shirley Gregor and Izak Benbasat. Explanations from intelligent systems: Theoretical foundations
and implications for practice. MIS Quarterly, 23(4):497–530, 1999.
Shihao Gu, Bryan Kelly, and Dacheng Xiu. Empirical asset pricing via machine learning. Review
of Financial Studies, 33(5):2223–2273, 2020.
Odd Erik Gundersen and Sigbjørn Kjensmo. State of the Art: Reproducibility in Artificial In
telligence. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 32(1), 2018. doi:
10.1609/aaai.v32i1.11503.
H. Han. Challenges of reproducible AI in biomedical data science. BMC Medical Genomics, 18
(Suppl 1):8, 2025.
Alon Jacovi and Yoav Goldberg. Towards faithfully interpretable NLP systems: How should we
define and evaluate faithfulness? In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 4198–4205, 2020.
JPMorganChase. Letter to shareholders from Mary Callahan Erdoes: Asset and Wealth Manage
ment. In 2025 Annual Report, JPMorgan Chase & Co., 2026.
Sayash Kapoor and Arvind Narayanan. Leakage and the reproducibility crisis in machine-learning
based science. Patterns, 4(9):100804, 2023.
Katherine C. Kellogg, Melissa A. Valentine, and Angéle Christin. Algorithms at Work: The New
Contested Terrain of Control. Academy of Management Annals, 14(1):366–410, 2020. doi: 10.
5465/annals.2018.0174.
Amir E. Khandani, Adlar J. Kim, and Andrew W. Lo. Consumer credit-risk models via machine
learning algorithms. Journal of Banking & Finance, 34(11):2767–2787, 2010. doi: 10.1016/j.
jbankfin.2010.06.001.
48
Laurie S. Kirsch. Portfolios of Control Modes and IS Project Management. Information Systems
Research, 8(3):215–239, 1997. doi: 10.1287/isre.8.3.215.
Charlotta Kronblad, Anna Essén, and Magnus Mähring. When justice is blind to algorithms:
Multilayered blackboxing of algorithmic decision-making in the public sector. MIS Quarterly, 48
(4):1637–1662, 2024.
Naveen Kumar, Xiahua Wei, and Han Zhang. Agentic artificial intelligence as a new frontier in
information systems: Promise, peril, and research opportunities. Information & Management, 63
(3):104317, 2026. doi: 10.1016/j.im.2026.104317.
Tamera Lanham, Anna Chen, Ansh Radhakrishnan, Benoit Steiner, Carson Denison, Danny Her
nandez, Dustin Li, Esin Durmus, Evan Hubinger, Jackson Kernion, Kamil˙e Lukoši¯ut˙e, Karina
Nguyen, Newton Cheng, Nicholas Joseph, Nicholas Schiefer, Oliver Rausch, Robin Larson, Sam
McCandlish, Sandipan Kundu, Saurav Kadavath, Shannon Yang, Thomas Henighan, Timo
thy Maxwell, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tristan Hume, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Jared Kaplan, Jan
Brauner, Samuel R. Bowman, and Ethan Perez. Measuring faithfulness in chain-of-thought rea
soning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13702, 2023.
Zachary C. Lipton. The Mythos of Model Interpretability. Queue, 16(3):31–57, 2018. doi: 10.1145/
3236386.3241340.
Jennifer M. Logg, Julia A. Minson, and Don A. Moore. Algorithm appreciation: People prefer
algorithmic to human judgment. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 151:
90–103, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.obhdp.2018.12.005.
Scott Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model Predictions.
arXiv:1705.07874v2, 2017.
Mastercard. Mastercard unveils Agent Pay, pioneering agentic payments technology to power com
merce in the age of AI. Company announcement, April 29, 2025.
Andreas Matthias. The responsibility gap: Ascribing responsibility for the actions of learning
automata. Ethics and Information Technology, 6(3):175–183, 2004.
Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben Hutchinson,
Elena Spitzer, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit Gebru. Model Cards for Model Reporting.
In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pages 220–229,
2019. doi: 10.1145/3287560.3287596.
Alex Murray, Jen Rhymer, and David G. Sirmon. Humans and Technology: Forms of Conjoined
Agency in Organizations. Academy of Management Review, 46(3):552–571, 2021. doi: 10.5465/
amr.2019.0186.
William G. Ouchi. Markets, Bureaucracies, and Clans. Administrative Science Quarterly, 25(1):
129–141, 1980. doi: 10.2307/2392231.
Raja Parasuraman and Victor Riley. Humans and Automation: Use, Misuse, Disuse, Abuse. Human
Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 39(2):230–253, 1997. doi:
10.1518/001872097778543886.
Roger D. Peng. Reproducible Research in Computational Science. Science, 334(6060):1226–1227,
2011. doi: 10.1126/science.1213847.
49
Joelle Pineau, Philippe Vincent-Lamarre, Koustuv Sinha, Vincent Larivière, Alina Beygelzimer,
Florence d’Alché Buc, Emily Fox, and Hugo Larochelle. Improving reproducibility in machine
learning research (a report from the NeurIPS 2019 reproducibility program). Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 22(164):1–20, 2021.
Edward Raff. A Step Toward Quantifying Independently Reproducible Machine Learning Research.
arXiv:1909.06674v1, 2019.
Arun Rai, Panos Constantinides, and Suprateek Sarker. Editor’s comments: Next-generation digital
platforms: Toward human–AI hybrids. MIS Quarterly, 43(1):iii–ix, 2019.
Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Andrew Smart, Rebecca N. White, Margaret Mitchell, Timnit Gebru,
Ben Hutchinson, Jamila Smith-Loud, Daniel Theron, and Parker Barnes. Closing the AI
Accountability Gap: Defining an End-to-End Framework for Internal Algorithmic Auditing.
arXiv:2001.00973v1, 2020.
Marco Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. “Why Should I Trust You?”: Explaining the
Predictions of Any Classifier. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Demonstrations, pages 97–101, 2016.
doi: 10.18653/v1/n16-3020.
Cynthia Rudin. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and
use interpretable models instead. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(5):206–215, 2019.
Jatinder Singh, Jennifer Cobbe, and Chris Norval. Decision provenance: Harnessing data flow for
accountable systems. IEEE Access, 7:6562–6574, 2019.
Linda J. Skitka, Kathleen L. Mosier, and Mark Burdick. Does automation bias decision-making?
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 51(5):991–1006, 1999. doi: 10.1006/ijhc.1999.
0252.
Tobin South, Samuele Marro, Thomas Hardjono, Robert Mahari, Cedric Deslandes Whitney, Dazza
Greenwood, Alan Chan, and Alex Pentland. Authenticated delegation and authorized AI agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09674, 2025.
Mike H. M. Teodorescu, Lily Morse, Yazeed Awwad, and Gerald C. Kane. Failures of Fairness in
Automation Require a Deeper Understanding of Human–ML Augmentation. MIS Quarterly, 45
(3):1483–1500, 2021. doi: 10.25300/misq/2021/16535.
Haileleol Tibebu. The accountability horizon: An impossibility theorem for governing human-agent
collectives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.07778, 2026.
Miles Turpin, Julian Michael, Ethan Perez, and Samuel R. Bowman. Language models don’t always
say what they think: Unfaithful explanations in chain-of-thought prompting. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 36, 2023.
Visa. Find and buy with AI: Visa unveils new era of commerce. Company announcement, April 30,
2025.
Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, and Chris Russell. Counterfactual Explanations Without Open
ing the Black Box: Automated Decisions and the GDPR. In SSRN Electronic Journal, 2017. doi:
10.2139/ssrn.3063289.
50
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai
Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, Wayne Xin Zhao, Zhewei Wei, and Ji-Rong Wen. A Survey on Large
Language Model based Autonomous Agents. arXiv:2308.11432v7, 2023.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc
V Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-Of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language
Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, pages 24824–24837, 2022.
doi: 10.52202/068431-1800.
Martin Wiener, Magnus Mähring, Ulrich Remus, and Carol Saunders. Control Configuration and
Control Enactment in Information Systems Projects: Review and Expanded Theoretical Frame
work. MIS Quarterly, 40(3):741–774, 2016. doi: 10.25300/misq/2016/40.3.11.
Maranke Wieringa. What to account for when accounting for algorithms. In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pages 1–18, 2020. doi: 10.1145/
3351095.3372833.
Yijia Xiao, Edward Sun, Di Luo, and Wei Wang. TradingAgents: Multi-agents LLM financial
trading framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.20138, 2024.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models. arXiv:2210.03629v3, 2022.
51
Supplemental Material
This appendix provides the detailed configuration for the controlled multi-agent experiment reported
in Study 2.
S1. The Multi-Agent Experiment
This supplement documents the multi-agent configuration used in Study 2. Everything needed to
rebuild and re-run it is provided here. The replication package contains the implementation file
run_agents.py.
S1.1 What Has to Be Held Fixed, and What Must Not Be
A reproduction measurement is only meaningful if the thing being varied is the thing an auditor
cannot control. Two decoding settings govern this.
The first is the random seed. When a provider accepts a fixed seed, sampling can become
reproducible under a fixed executable. A fixed-seed measurement therefore reports implementation
determinism. It does not reproduce the conditions faced by a later verifier. In deployment, the
decision-time seed may not be retained or exposed. Our main comparisons therefore vary the seed
across repetitions.
The second is temperature. Pinning temperature to zero is the strongest available control over
how the model chooses its words. It is also the control that the provider withdrew in the release line
examined in Study 1. When it is gone, what an auditor gets is the provider’s default. We therefore
report the condition in which temperature is not sent at all.
One further detail matters for reading conditions B and C. Within a single decision, every call
in the chain receives the same seed. These conditions therefore understate divergence relative to
a deployment in which each call is sampled independently. Condition D removes the seed entirely
and is the least controlled condition. The four conditions are summarized in Table S1:
Table S1: Decoding conditions. Condition A is an implementation check; Conditions B–D progres
sively remove controls relevant to later replay.
Temperature
Seed
What it measures
A
B
C
D
pinned to 0
pinned to 0
not sent
not sent
fixed
varied
varied
not sent
Whether the implementation is deterministic.
Whether the seed matters once temperature is
pinned.
The effect of releasing the temperature alone.
What an auditor faces: neither control is available.
S1.2 The Multi-Agent Configuration
The orchestration arm implements the governance logic shown in Figure 5. Direct access to the
original case is restricted to the first layer. Upstream roles are report-only, and every designated
handoff is retained. Only the terminal Decider may issue the financial action. Scaled configurations
vary the number of specialist calls while preserving these restrictions. Table S2 reports the canonical
role functions. The replication package generates the exact graph, role multiplicities, and call count
used at each scale. Its configuration files should be treated as the authoritative specification.
52
Each model call receives only the inputs designated by the graph. The terminal action is
therefore produced from retained upstream reports rather than from an unrecorded vote or direct
access to the original case. We record every role output and handoff. This makes it possible to
identify the first exact divergence. It also shows whether later stages absorb, propagate, or compress
that divergence before the final verdict.
Table S2: Canonical role functions in the controlled multi-agent configuration.
Agent
Layer Reads
Instruction
retrieval
market
policy
analyst
risk
compliance
aml
quant
customer
critic
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
3
3
4
the case
the case
the case
retrieval, policy
retrieval, market
retrieval, policy
retrieval
analyst, risk
compliance, aml
quant, customer
Extract every decision-relevant fact and number. Do
not judge.
Summarize the market and environment signals. Do
not judge.
State the policy thresholds and rules that apply. Do
not judge.
Assess quantitatively against the stated thresholds. Do
not choose an action.
State the material risks and an overall severity. Do not
choose an action.
Flag any regulatory or fair-treatment concern. Do not
choose an action.
Flag any financial-crime or counterparty concern. Do
not choose an action.
Score each allowed option on expected benefit and
downside. Do not choose.
State the effect on the customer or counterparty. Do
not choose.
Challenge the emerging view; name the strongest ar
gument against it. Do not choose.
decider
5
quant, customer,
critic
Choose exactly one allowed label and give a one
sentence reason.
S1.3 Execution
Both agent configurations used the same locally served model (llama3.2:3b) on the same machine.
They also used the same 32 fixed cases: eight each in credit, trade, AML, and rebalancing. A locally
served model is the right control: it removes the provider from the picture entirely, so that whatever
divergence appears cannot be attributed to an upstream update.
Exact call counts for each scale are generated from the replication configuration files rather than
entered manually in the manuscript.
Alongside the verdict, we record every agent’s output for every run. This design supports a
second measurement that a single call cannot yield. We identify the earliest agent whose text differs
across repetitions of the same case. That point locates where irreproducibility enters and how far
it travels before reaching the verdict.
S1.4 What This Configuration Does and Does Not Implement
This arm isolates orchestration. It fixes the communication graph within each configuration, freezes
tool payloads, and traverses the graph once. It excludes live retrieval, persistent memory, au
tonomous goal decomposition, iteration, and self-correction. Provider-side and live-environment
53
changes are examined separately in Study 1. The orchestration results should therefore be inter
preted as a bounded estimate of architecture-induced divergence with the external environment held
fixed.
S2. Proofs and Formal Calibration
This appendix proves the results stated in Sections 4.4 and 7.1, records one further consequence,
and calibrates the quantities against the experimental data.
S2.1 Notation
Calls are indexed i = 1,...,m in a topological order of the communication graph; Sk denotes the
outputs of layer k, T the complete trace, and Y = g(T) the action, recovered by a fixed parser from
the terminal Decider output. For two independent repetitions of the same case, RT = Pr[T(1) = T(2)]
and RO =Pr[Y(1) = Y(2)]. Define the conditional self-agreement of call i,
pi = PrZ(1)
i
=Z(2)
i
Z(1)
j
=Z(2)
j
∀j < i ,
and the compression probability κ = Pr[Y (1) = Y (2) | T(1) ̸ = T(2)].
(S1)
Lemma 1. (i) RT = m
i=1pi, so RT is non-increasing in m and RT ≤ ¯pm whenever pi ≤ ¯p.
(ii) RO = RT +κ(1−RT) ≥ RT; in particular RO = κ when RT = 0. (iii) The estimator used
in the main text satisfies RO = |C|−1
cexp(−H∞(ˆqc)), where qc is the verdict distribution across
repetitions of case c and H∞(q) = −logmaxℓqℓ.
Proof. (i) Let Ai = {Z(1)
i
= Z(2)
i
}. Exact trace identity is i≤mAi, and the chain rule gives
Pr[ iAi] = iPr[Ai | j<iAj] = ipi by (S1). The conditioning in (S1) is what makes this an
identity rather than an independence assumption. (ii) Y is a deterministic function of T, so trace
identity implies verdict identity; total probability over {T(1) = T(2)} and its complement gives the
decomposition. (iii) maxℓ qℓ = exp(−H∞(q)), averaged over cases.
S2.2 Proofs of the reversibility results
Proof of Theorem 1. The inequalities are the data-processing inequality applied along Equation 3,
which is valid precisely because no layer beyond the first reads C; the final step adds the deterministic
map Y =g(T). Iterating the strong data-processing inequality, whose coefficient ηk is strictly below
one whenever the layer-k channel maps distinct inputs to overlapping output distributions, yields
the geometric bound. Corollary 1 is the case k > 1 of the same chain.
Proof of Theorem 2. (i)⇔(iv): with Ek trivial, the map Sk → [Sk−1]σ of Definition 1 is well defined
exactly when no two materially distinct upstream states share a downstream image. (iv)⇒(ii):
an injective relabelling preserves mutual information. (ii)⇒(iii): equality in the data-processing
inequality holds iff C → Sk → Sk−1 is also a Markov chain, which is the definition of sufficiency.
(iii)⇒(iv) modulo ≡σ: a sufficient statistic induces no collapse of materially distinct states.
Proof of Theorem 3. Non-injectivity modulo ≡σ means there are s ̸≡σ s′ with the same image. The
map of Definition 1 is then not well defined, and because materiality means C is not independent
of the distinction between s and s′, the inequality I(C;Sk) < I(C;Sk−1) is strict, i.e. ηk < 1. The
converse is Theorem 2(i)⇔(iv).
54
Proof of Theorem 4. Reversibility requires [T]σ to be a function of (Y,E) almost surely, so H([T]σ |
Y,E) = 0. Then
H([T]σ | Y) ≤ H([T]σ | Y)+H(E | Y,[T]σ) = H(E | Y)+H([T]σ | Y,E) = H(E | Y) ≤ H(E).
Achievability is the standard construction: a code for the conditional distribution of the pre-image
within each stage attains the conditional entropy, and the stage-wise terms compose by the chain
rule. Corollary 2 is the definition of Gdq with these two quantities substituted, and Corollary 3
follows because Theorem 3 makes each compressing stage contribute a strictly positive term.
S2.3 Proofs of the metric results
Proof of Theorem 5. Foranydistribution on L labels, maxℓ qℓ ≥ 1/L, so RO ≥ 1/LbyLemma1(iii);
at the population level Pr[Y (1) = Y (2)] = ℓq2
ℓ ≥ 1/L by Cauchy–Schwarz. The two limits are
Lemma 1(i) and Theorem 1. Corollary 4 follows by exhibiting the constant policy, for which qc = δℓ0
for every c, giving RO = 1 and I(C;Y) = 0.
Proof of Theorem 6. Under A, qc = δℓ⋆(c); under B, qc = δℓ0
. Both are point masses, so for each
case the empirical distribution over K repetitions is a point mass almost surely, and any functional
of {qc} that does not reference label identities across cases evaluates identically under the two
systems. Statistics that do reference cross-case label identity are excluded by hypothesis, which is
Corollary 5.
S2.4 Non-monotonicity of outcome reproducibility
Theorem 7. With ∆f(n) = f(n+1)−f(n),
∆RO(n) = (1−κn+1)∆RT(n)
≤0
+(1−RT(n))∆κ(n)
sign of ∆κ
.
(S2)
Whenever added depth coarsens the terminal map enough that the second term dominates, RO rises
while RT falls. The independent-compounding benchmark is the restriction κn ≡ κ, which deletes
the second term.
Proof. Differencing Lemma 1(ii) and collecting terms gives (S2); the sign of the first term follows
from Lemma 1(i).
Theorem 7 predicts both the shape of the agent-count sweep and the pairing that the data
exhibit: local maxima of RO should coincide with local minima of I(C;Y ), because both are driven
by the same coarsening of g. It also identifies the assumption that the dashed benchmark in Figure 9
violates.
The measured data sit in a degenerate case of (S2) that is worth stating plainly. Since RT = 0
at every depth and at both model scales, ∆RT(n) = 0, the first term vanishes, and ∆RO(n) =
∆κ(n) exactly. The trace-decay force is not competing with compression in the observed range; it
reached its floor at one agent and has no further room. Everything the sweep shows about outcome
reproducibility is therefore a statement about compression alone. The two-term decomposition is
what tells us this, and a configuration with RT > 0 — a shallower pipeline, a pinned execution
environment — is where the first term would become observable.
55
S2.5Empiricalcalibration
TableS3reportspairwiseestimatesfromthefrozen32-casetestbed,k=5repetitions,seeds1000
1004,withidentical codeandcasesacrossmodel scales. Mutual informationiscomputedwithin
decisionfamilyunderauniformcaseprior.
TableS3: Pairwise trace identity, outcomeagreement, impliedcompression, anddiscrimination.
Releasedtemperature is theconditionanauditor facesonce theproviderwithdraws thecontrol.
WithL=2or3perfamily,thefloorofTheorem5liesbetween.33and.50.
Model Condition RT RO κ I(C;Y)(bits)
llama3.2:3b released,n=1 0.0000 0.8313 0.8313 0.2986
released,n=5 0.0000 0.5938 0.5938 0.2130
released,n=10 0.0000 0.6594 0.6594 0.2118
released,n=20 0.0000 0.7844 0.7844 0.1429
released,n=30 0.0000 0.6687 0.6687 0.1781
released,n=40 0.0000 0.7875 0.7875 0.0853
released,n=50 0.0000 0.7344 0.7344 0.1990
llama3.2:3b temperature0,n=1 1.0000 1.0000 — —
temperature0,n=10 0.9375 1.0000 1.0000 —
llama3.1:8b released,n=1 0.0000 0.7875 0.7875 0.2434
released,n=5 0.0000 0.5813 0.5813 0.2474
released,n=10 0.0000 0.6281 0.6281 0.2591
released,n=20 0.0000 0.5375 0.5375 0.1076
released,n=30 0.0000 0.5281 0.5281 0.1366
released,n=40 0.0000 0.6562 0.6562 0.1494
released,n=50 0.0000 0.5312 0.5312 0.1105
llama3.1:8b temperature0,n=1 0.9688 1.0000 1.0000 —
temperature0,n=10 0.4500 0.9125 0.8409 —
Thedecouplingregimeistheempiricalregime. Underreleasedtemperature,RT=0ateverydepth
andbothmodel scales. ByLemma1(ii)theoutcomecolumnis thecompressioncolumn. Verdict
agreement inthis regimemeasureshowstronglythe terminalmapcollapsesdistinct traces, and
nothingelse.
Thepredictedpairingappears. Thelargestsweepvalueofoutcomereproducibility,RO=.7875at
n=40,coincideswiththesmallestdiscrimination,I(C;Y)=.0853bits,underathirdofthesingle
agentvalue.ThisisthepairingTheorem7predictsandtheempiricalsignatureofCorollary4: the
configurationscoringbestontheauditmetricretainedthe least informationaboutwhichcase it
wasdeciding.
Afloorondestroyed information. Under releasedtemperature, everycaseproducedfivedistinct
traces infiverepetitions, collapsingto1.4–1.8distinctverdicts. Theterminalmapthereforede
stroyedat least log2(5/1.44)≈1.8bitsperepisodeat3Bandlog2(5/1.81)≈1.5bitsat8B.These
arefloors impliedbyfive samples of avastly larger trace space, not estimates ofH([T]σ | Y);
the true requirement is larger. An institutionretainingonlythefinal actionretainsnoneof the
destroyedinformation,soGdq>0byCorollary2foreveryepisodeintheexperiment.
Compositionamplifiesaper-calldefect. Forllama3.1:8battemperature0thesingle-callestimate
is ˆp≈.9688. ConstantpiwouldpredictRT≈.968811≈.70atelevencalls; theobservedvalue is
.45. BecauseLemma1(i) isanidentity, theshortfall isnotestimationerror: pimust fall forcalls
56
conditioned on longer upstream context. This is a quantitative form of the serial-decay mechanism
obtained without further assumptions.
Estimation caveat. With K = 5 repetitions and eight cases per family, plug-in mutual information
is upward-biased and noisy; the n = 50 value should not be read as a reversal. The theory constrains
the bound in Theorem 1, not the sample path, and the comparison that carries weight is between
the extremes rather than between adjacent depths.
S2.6 What does not follow: model scale
Model scale enters this theory in two places only: the per-call parameters pi of (S1), and the
contraction coefficients ηk induced by how a given model summarizes. Neither is a monotone
function of parameter count, and no such monotonicity is observed here. The defensible claim is
narrower and concerns controls rather than capability: retained process reproducibility is governed
by whether the deployed configuration achieves pi = 1, not by how capable the model is. Because
RT = ipi, any deployment with pi < 1 loses exact process reproducibility geometrically in causal
depth; and because discrimination contracts along the same chain, a more capable model composed
more deeply is not thereby more auditable.
S3. Provider Concentration in U.S. Mortgage Underwriting
P7 assumes that many institutions depend on the same upstream provider. This section reports
whether that structure is present in a market where the dependency is publicly recorded. It is
descriptive. Nothing here identifies the effect of a provider change; it establishes only that the
exposure P7 presupposes exists at scale.
Every U.S. mortgage application covered by the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act is filed with the
applicant’s outcome, the reporting institution, and—since the 2018 reporting revision—the auto
mated underwriting system that evaluated it. That last field makes provider dependence directly
observable rather than inferred. We use the public loan-level files for 2019–2023 in the six largest
reporting states (CA, TX, NY, FL, IL, PA), restricted to applications that received a credit decision
(originated, approved but not accepted, or denied): 24,439,380 applications filed by 4,487 institu
tions. The overall denial rate is 20.1%, and debt-to-income ratio is the most frequently reported
primary denial reason (31.6%).
Table S4: Automated underwriting systems in U.S. mortgage applications, 2019–2023, six states.
Shares are of applications evaluated by some automated system; applications reporting no such
system are excluded from the share denominator. The Herfindahl–Hirschman index is computed
over system shares.
Year AUS-decided
Desktop Loan Product
applications Underwriter
TOTAL Top two HHI
Advisor Scorecard
(Fannie Mae)
(Freddie Mac)
(FHA)
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2,929,098
4,818,652
5,149,015
2,085,854
1,582,341
63.9%
64.8%
64.4%
61.8%
55.8%
15.9%
23.9%
25.6%
22.2%
21.9%
8.2%
5.2%
4.4%
8.6%
11.9%
79.8% 4,535
88.7% 4,832
90.0% 4,834
84.0% 4,416
77.7% 3,786
Two features of Table S4 bear on P7. Concentration is high and persistent: two systems, both
57
owned by government-sponsored enterprises, evaluate between 77.7% and 90.0% of automated deci
sions in every year, and the Herfindahl–Hirschman index stays between 3,786 and 4,834 throughout.
Dependence is also broad rather than confined to large filers. In 2021, 1,674 distinct institutions
routed applications through Desktop Underwriter and 1,241 through Loan Product Advisor.
Dependence is concentrated at the level of the individual institution as well as the market. Of the
2,376 institutions that used any automated system, 52.6% sent more than 90% of their automated
decisions through a single one, and 35.9% sent more than 99%. For roughly a third of reporting
lenders, one provider evaluates essentially every automated credit decision they make.
This is the exposure structure P7 describes. Whether an upstream change to either system
produces the synchronized loss of historical reproducibility that P7 predicts is not tested here, and
the data do not support that test: HMDA records the system used, not its version, and reports the
applicant’s debt-to-income ratio as filed rather than as evaluated at decision time.
5











_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________


NIST SPECIAL PUBLICATION 1800-5 
IT Asset Management 
Includes Executive Summary (A); Approach, Architecture, and Security Characteristics (B);  
and How-To Guides (C) 
Michael Stone 
Chinedum Irrechukwu 
Harry Perper 
Devin Wynne 
Leah Kauffman, Editor-in-Chief 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5 
The first draft of this publication is available free of charge from: 
https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/sites/default/files/library/sp1800/fs-itam-nist-sp1800-5-draft.pdf  
NIST SPECIAL PUBLICATION 1800-5 
IT Asset Management 
Includes Executive Summary (A); Approach, Architecture, and Security Characteristics (B); 
and How-To Guides (C) 
Michael Stone 
National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence 
Information Technology Laboratory 
Chinedum Irrechukwu 
Harry Perper 
Devin Wynne 
The MITRE Corporation 
McLean, VA 
Leah Kauffman, Editor-in-Chief 
National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence 
Information Technology Laboratory 
September 2018 
U.S. Department of Commerce 
Wilbur Ross, Secretary 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Walter G. Copan, Undersecretary of Commerce for Standards and Technology and Director 
NIST SPECIAL PUBLICATION 1800-5A 
IT Asset Management 
Volume A: 
Executive Summary 
Michael Stone 
Leah Kauffman, Editor-in-Chief 
National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence 
Information Technology Laboratory 
Chinedum Irrechukwu 
Harry Perper 
Devin Wynne 
The MITRE Corporation 
McLean, VA 
September 2018 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5 
The first draft of this publication is available free of charge from: 
https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/sites/default/files/library/sp1800/fs-itam-nist-sp1800-5-draft.pdf  
Executive Summary 
▪ The National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE), part of the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST), developed an example solution that financial services 
companies can use for a more secure and efficient way of monitoring and managing their many 
information technology (IT) hardware and software assets. 
▪ The security characteristics in our IT asset management platform are derived from the best 
practices of standards organizations, including the Payment Card Industry Data Security 
Standard (PCI DSS). 
▪ The NCCoE’s approach uses open source and commercially available products that can be 
included alongside current products in your existing infrastructure. It provides a centralized, 
comprehensive view of networked hardware and software across an enterprise, reducing 
vulnerabilities and response time to security alerts, and increasing resilience. 
▪ The example solution is packaged as a “How To” guide that demonstrates implementation of 
standards-based cybersecurity technologies in the real world. The guide helps organizations gain 
efficiencies in asset management, while saving them research and proof of concept costs. 
CHALLENGE 
Large financial services organizations employ tens or hundreds of thousands of individuals. At this scale, 
the technology base required to ensure smooth business operations (including computers, mobile 
devices, operating systems, applications, data, and network resources) is massive. To effectively 
manage, use, and secure each of those assets, you need to know their locations and functions. While 
physical assets can be labeled with bar codes and tracked in a database, this approach does not answer 
questions such as “What operating systems are our laptops running?” and “Which devices are 
vulnerable to the latest threat?” 
Computer security professionals in the financial services sector told us they are challenged by the vast 
diversity of hardware and software they attempt to track, and by a lack of centralized control: A large 
financial services organization can include subsidiaries, branches, third-party partners, contractors, as 
well as temporary workers and guests. This complexity makes it difficult to assess vulnerabilities or to 
respond quickly to threats, and to accurately assess risk in the first place (by pinpointing the most 
business essential assets). 
SOLUTION 
The NIST Cybersecurity IT Asset Management Practice Guide is a proof-of-concept solution 
demonstrating commercially available technologies that can be implemented to track the location and 
configuration of networked devices and software across an enterprise. Our example solution spans 
traditional physical asset tracking, IT asset information, physical security, and vulnerability and 
compliance information. Users can now query one system and gain insight into their entire IT asset 
portfolio. 
NIST SP 1800-5A: IT Asset Management  
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5 
1 
This guide: 
▪ maps security characteristics to guidance and best practices from NIST and other standards 
organizations, including the PCI DSS 
▪ provides: 
• a detailed example solution with capabilities that address security controls 
• instructions for implementers and security engineers, including examples of all the 
necessary components for installation, configuration, and integration 
▪ is modular and uses products that are readily available and interoperable with your existing IT 
infrastructure and investments 
While the NCCoE used a suite of commercial products to address this challenge, this guide does not 
endorse these particular products, nor does it guarantee compliance with any regulatory initiatives. Your 
organization’s information security experts should identify the products that will best integrate with 
your existing tools and IT system infrastructure. Your organization can adopt this solution or one that 
adheres to these guidelines in whole, or you can use this guide as a starting point for tailoring and 
implementing parts of a solution. 
BENEFITS 
Our example solution has the following benefits: 
▪ enables faster responses to security alerts by revealing the location, configuration, and owner of 
a device 
▪ increases cybersecurity resilience: you can focus attention on the most valuable assets 
▪ provides detailed system information to auditors 
▪ determines how many software licenses are actually used in relation to how many have been 
paid for 
▪ reduces help desk response times: staff will know what is installed and the latest pertinent 
errors and alerts 
▪ reduces the attack surface of each device by ensuring that software is correctly patched 
SHARE YOUR FEEDBACK 
You can view or download the guide at https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/use-cases/financial
services-sector/it-asset-management. If you adopt this solution for your own organization, please share 
your experience and advice with us. We recognize that technical solutions alone will not fully enable the 
benefits of our solution, so we encourage organizations to share lessons learned and best practices for 
transforming the processes associated with implementing this guide. 
To learn more by arranging a demonstration of this example implementation, contact the NCCoE at 
financial_nccoe@nist.gov. 
NIST SP 1800-5A: IT Asset Management  
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5 
2 
TECHNOLOGY PARTNERS/COLLABORATORS 
Organizations participating in this project submitted their capabilities in response to an open call in the 
Federal Register for all sources of relevant security capabilities from academia and industry (vendors 
and integrators). The following respondents with relevant capabilities or product components (identified 
as “Technology Partners/Collaborators” herein) signed a Cooperative Research and Development 
Agreement (CRADA) to collaborate with NIST in a consortium to build this example solution. 
Certain commercial entities, equipment, products, or materials may be identified by name or company 
logo or other insignia in order to acknowledge their participation in this collaboration or to describe an 
experimental procedure or concept adequately. Such identification is not intended to imply special 
status or relationship with NIST or recommendation or endorsement by NIST or NCCoE, neither is it 
intended to imply that the entities, equipment, products, or materials are necessarily the best available 
for the purpose. 
The National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE), a part of the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), is a collaborative 
hub where industry organizations, government agencies, and academic 
institutions work together to address businesses’ most pressing 
easily 
cybersecurity challenges. Through this collaboration, the NCCoE develops 
modular, 
adaptable 
example 
cybersecurity 
solutions 
demonstrating how to apply standards and best practices using 
commercially available technology. 
NIST SP 1800-5A: IT Asset Management  
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5 
LEARN MORE 
Visit https://www.nccoe.nist.gov 
nccoe@nist.gov 
301-975-0200 
3 
NIST SPECIAL PUBLICATION 1800-5B 
IT Asset Management 
Volume B: 
Approach, Architecture, and Security Characteristics 
Michael Stone 
Leah Kauffman, Editor-in-Chief 
National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence 
Information Technology Laboratory 
Chinedum Irrechukwu 
Harry Perper 
Devin Wynne 
The MITRE Corporation 
McLean, VA 
September 2018 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5 
The first draft of this publication is available free of charge from: 
https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/sites/default/files/library/sp1800/fs-itam-nist-sp1800-5-draft.pdf  
DISCLAIMER 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Certain commercial entities, equipment, products, or materials may be identified in this document in 
order to describe an experimental procedure or concept adequately. Such identification is not intended 
to imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST or NCCoE, nor is it intended to imply that the 
entities, equipment, products, or materials are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 1800-5B, Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. 
Spec. Publ. 1800-5B, 47 pages, (September 2018), CODEN: NSPUE2 
FEEDBACK 
As a private-public partnership, we are always seeking feedback on our Practice Guides. We are 
particularly interested in seeing how businesses apply NCCoE reference designs in the real world. If you 
have implemented the reference design, or have questions about applying it in your environment, 
please email us at financial_nccoe@nist.gov. 
All comments are subject to release under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). 
National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
100 Bureau Drive 
Mailstop 2002 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Email: nccoe@nist.gov  
i 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY CENTER OF EXCELLENCE 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
The National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE), a part of the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST), is a collaborative hub where industry organizations, government agencies, and 
academic institutions work together to address businesses' most pressing cybersecurity issues. This 
public-private partnership enables the creation of practical cybersecurity solutions for specific 
industries, as well as for broad, cross-sector technology challenges. Through consortia under 
Cooperative Research and Development Agreements (CRADAs), including technology partners—from 
Fortune 50 market leaders to smaller companies specializing in IT security—the NCCoE applies standards 
and best practices to develop modular, easily adaptable example cybersecurity solutions using 
commercially available technology. The NCCoE documents these example solutions in the NIST Special 
Publication 1800 series, which maps capabilities to the NIST Cyber Security Framework and details the 
steps needed for another entity to recreate the example solution. The NCCoE was established in 2012 by 
NIST in partnership with the State of Maryland and Montgomery County, Md. 
To learn more about the NCCoE, visit https://www.nccoe.nist.gov. To learn more about NIST, visit 
https://www.nist.gov.  
NIST CYBERSECURITY PRACTICE GUIDES 
NIST Cybersecurity Practice Guides (Special Publication Series 1800) target specific cybersecurity 
challenges in the public and private sectors. They are practical, user-friendly guides that facilitate the 
adoption of standards-based approaches to cybersecurity. They show members of the information 
security community how to implement example solutions that help them align more easily with relevant 
standards and best practices, and provide users with the materials lists, configuration files, and other 
information they need to implement a similar approach. 
The documents in this series describe example implementations of cybersecurity practices that 
businesses and other organizations may voluntarily adopt. These documents do not describe regulations 
or mandatory practices, nor do they carry statutory authority. 
ABSTRACT 
While a physical asset management system can tell you the location of a computer, it cannot answer 
questions like, “What operating systems are our laptops running?” and “Which devices are vulnerable to 
the latest threat?” An effective IT asset management (ITAM) solution can tie together physical and virtual 
assets and provide management with a complete picture of what, where, and how assets are being used. 
ITAM enhances visibility for security analysts, which leads to better asset utilization and security. 
KEYWORDS 
asset management; financial sector; information technology asset management; ITAM; personnel 
security; physical security; operational security 
ii 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management iii 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We are grateful to the following individuals for their generous contributions of expertise and time. 
Name Organization 
FS-ISAC Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis Center 
Gorrell Cheek Western Union 
Joe Buselmeier American Express 
Sean Franklin American Express 
Ron Ritchey Bank of America 
Sounil Yu Bank of America 
Joel Van Dyk Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation 
Dan Schutzer Financial Services Roundtable 
George Mattingly Navy Federal Credit Union 
Jimmie Owens Navy Federal Credit Union 
Mike Curry State Street 
Timothy Shea RSA 
Mark McGovern MobileSystem7 
Atul Shah Microsoft 
Leah Kauffman NIST 
Benham (Ben) Shariati University of Maryland Baltimore County 
Valerie Herrington Herrington Technologies 
Susan Symington MITRE Corporation 
Sallie Edwards MITRE Corporation 
 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management iv 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Name Organization 
Sarah Weeks MITRE Corporation 
Lina Scorza MITRE Corporation 
Karen Scarfone Scarfone Cybersecurity 
 
The Technology Partners/Collaborators who participated in this build submitted their capabilities in 
response to a notice in the Federal Register. Respondents with relevant capabilities or product 
components were invited to sign a Cooperative Research and Development Agreement (CRADA) with 
NIST, allowing them to participate in a consortium to build this example solution. We worked with: 
Technology Partner/Collaborator Build Involvement 
AlphaPoint Technology AssetCentral 
Belarc BelManage, BelManage Analytics 
Computer Associates ITAM 
Microsoft WSUS, Server 2012R2 Certificate Authority 
Peniel Solutions Technology/Industry Expertise 
PI Achievers Penetration Testing Services 
PuppetLabs Puppet 
RedJack Fathom 
Splunk Splunk Enterprise 
Tyco iStar Edge 
Vanguard Integrity Professionals Security Manager 
 
 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management v 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Contents 
1 Summary ............................................................................................ 1 
1.1 Challenge ....................................................................................................................... 1 
1.2 Solution .......................................................................................................................... 2 
1.3 Risks ............................................................................................................................... 2 
1.4 Benefits .......................................................................................................................... 3 
2 How to Use This Guide ........................................................................ 4 
2.1 Typographic Conventions .............................................................................................. 6 
3 Introduction ........................................................................................ 6 
4 Approach ............................................................................................ 7 
4.1 Audience ........................................................................................................................ 7 
4.2 Scope ............................................................................................................................. 7 
4.3 Assumptions .................................................................................................................. 8 
4.3.1 Security ......................................................................................................................... 8 
4.3.2 Modularity .................................................................................................................... 8 
4.3.3 Technical Implementation ............................................................................................ 8 
4.3.4 Tracking and Location ................................................................................................... 8 
4.3.5 Operating Systems ........................................................................................................ 8 
4.4 Constraints .................................................................................................................... 9 
4.4.1 Limited Scalability Testing ............................................................................................. 9 
4.4.2 Limited Assets ............................................................................................................... 9 
4.4.3 Mobile Devices .............................................................................................................. 9 
4.4.4 Network Devices ........................................................................................................... 9 
4.4.5 Limited Replication of Enterprise Network................................................................. 10 
4.5 Risk Assessment and Mitigation .................................................................................. 10 
4.5.1 Assessing Risk Posture ................................................................................................ 11 
4.5.2 Security Characteristics and Controls Mapping .......................................................... 12 
4.6 Technologies ................................................................................................................ 23 
 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management vi 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
5 Architecture ...................................................................................... 27 
5.1 Reference Architecture Description ............................................................................ 27 
5.2 Reference Architecture Relationship .......................................................................... 32 
5.3 Building an Instance of the Reference Architecture ................................................... 33 
5.3.1 ITAM Build ................................................................................................................... 33 
5.3.2 Access Authorization Information Flow and Control Points ....................................... 37 
5.3.3 Tier 1 Systems ............................................................................................................. 39 
5.3.4 Tier 2 Systems ............................................................................................................. 39 
5.3.5 Tier 3 Systems ............................................................................................................. 42 
Appendix A List of Acronyms ................................................................. 45 
Appendix B References ......................................................................... 46 
 
List of Figures 
Figure 5-1 Reference Architecture ...................................................................................................... 28 
Figure 5-2 ITAM Reference Functionality ............................................................................................ 29 
Figure 5-3 Typical Asset Lifecycle [13] ................................................................................................ 30 
Figure 5-4 ITAM Build ......................................................................................................................... 34 
Figure 5-5 DMZ Network .................................................................................................................... 35 
Figure 5-6 Network Security Network ................................................................................................ 35 
Figure 5-7 IT Systems Network ........................................................................................................... 36 
Figure 5-8 Physical Security Network ................................................................................................. 36 
Figure 5-9 Physical Asset Management .............................................................................................. 37 
Figure 5-10 ITAM Data Flow ............................................................................................................... 38 
 
List of Tables 
Table 4-1 Security Characteristics and Controls Mapping ................................................................... 13 
Table 4-2 Products and Technologies ................................................................................................. 23 
 
1 Summary 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Companies in the financial services sector can use this NIST Cybersecurity Practice Guide to more 
securely and efficiently monitor and manage their organization's many information technology (IT) 
assets. IT asset management (ITAM) is foundational to an effective cybersecurity strategy and is 
prominently featured in the SANS Critical Security Controls [1] and NIST Framework for Improving 
Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity [2]. 
During the project development, we focused on a modular architecture that would allow organizations 
to adopt some or all of the example capabilities in this practice guide. Depending on factors like size, 
sophistication, risk tolerance, and threat landscape, organizations should make their own 
determinations about the breadth of IT asset management capabilities they need to implement. 
This example solution is packaged as a “How-To” guide that demonstrates how to implement standards
based cybersecurity technologies in the real world with a risk-based approach. We used open-source 
and commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) products that are currently available today. The guide helps 
organizations gain efficiencies in IT asset management, while saving them research and proof of concept 
costs. 
This guide aids those responsible for tracking assets, configuration management, and cybersecurity in a 
financial services sector enterprise. Typically, this group will comprise those who possess procurement, 
implementation, and policy authority. 
1.1 Challenge 
The security engineers we consulted in the financial services sector told us they are challenged by 
identifying assets across the enterprise and keeping track of their status and configurations, including 
hardware and software. This comprises two large technical issues: 
1. tracking a diverse set of hardware and software. Examples of hardware include servers, 
workstations, and network devices. Examples of software include operating systems, 
applications, and files. 
2. lack of total control by the host organization. Financial services sector organizations can include 
subsidiaries, branches, third-party partners, contractors, temporary workers, and guests. It is 
impossible to regulate and mandate a single hardware and software baseline against such a 
diverse group. 
1 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
1.2 Solution 
An effective ITAM solution needs several characteristics, including: 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
▪ complement existing asset management, security, and network systems 
▪ provide application programming interfaces to communicate with other security devices and 
systems such as firewalls and intrusion detection and identity and access management systems 
▪ know and control which assets, both virtual and physical, are connected to the enterprise 
network 
▪ automatically detect and alert when unauthorized devices attempt to access the network, also 
known as asset discovery 
▪ enable administrators to define and control the hardware and software that can be connected 
to the corporate environment 
▪ enforce software restriction policies relating to what software is allowed to run in the corporate 
environment 
▪ record and track attributes of assets 
▪ audit and monitor changes in an asset's state and connection 
▪ integrate with log analysis tools to collect and store audited information 
The ITAM solution developed and built at the NCCoE, and described in this document, meets all of these 
characteristics. 
1.3 Risks 
In addition to being effective, the ITAM solution must also be secure and not introduce new 
vulnerabilities into an organization. To reduce this risk, the NCCoE used security controls and best 
practices from NIST [3], the Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) [4] and International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) [5], and the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
(FFIEC). How these individual controls are met by individual components of this solution can be seen in 
Table 4-2. 
Some of the security controls we implemented include: 
▪ access control policy 
▪ continuous monitoring and tracking of assets connected to a network 
▪ event auditing 
▪ anomalous activity detection and reporting 
▪ vulnerability scanning 
2 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
By implementing an ITAM solution based on controls and best practices, implementers can tailor their 
deployment to their organization's security risk assessment, risk tolerance, and budget. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
1.4 Benefits 
The build described here employs passive and active data collectors/sensors across an enterprise to 
gather asset information and send it to a centralized location. The data collectors/sensors specialize in 
gathering information from different devices, no matter their operating system. Machines used by direct 
employees receive software agents that report on configuration, while temporary employees and 
contractors receive “dissolvable” agents and more passive sensing. Dissolvable agents are automatically 
downloaded to the client, run, and are removed. All of this information is gathered at a central location 
for analysis and reporting. You can choose to view all the activity in an enterprise, or configure the 
system to choose which machines are monitored, how much data is collected, and how long the data is 
retained. 
The example solution described in this guide has the following benefits: 
▪ enables faster responses to security alerts by revealing the location, configuration, and owner of 
a device 
▪ increases cybersecurity resilience: help security analysts focus on the most valuable or critical 
assets 
▪ improves and reduces reporting time for management and auditing 
▪ provides software license utilization statistics (to identify cost reduction opportunities) 
▪ reduces help desk response times: staff already know what is installed and the latest pertinent 
errors and alerts 
▪ reduces the attack surface of machines by ensuring that software is correctly patched/updated 
Other potential benefits include, but are not limited to rapid, transparent deployment and removal 
using consistent, efficient, and automated processes; improved situational awareness; and an improved 
security posture gained from tracking and auditing access requests and other ITAM activity across all 
networks. 
This NIST Cybersecurity Practice Guide: 
▪ maps security characteristics to guidance and best practices from NIST and other standards 
organizations as well as the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council IT Examination 
Handbook and Cyber Assessment Tool (CAT) guidance 
▪ provides 
• a detailed example solution with capabilities that address security controls 
3 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
• instructions for implementers and security engineers, including examples of all the 
necessary components and installation, configuration, and integration 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
▪ is modular and uses products that are readily available and interoperable with your existing IT 
infrastructure and investments 
Your organization can be confident that these results can be replicated: We performed functional 
testing and submitted the entire build to verification testing. An independent second team verified the 
build documentation based on the information in this practice guide. 
While we have used a suite of open source and commercial products to address this challenge, this 
guide does not endorse these particular products, nor does it guarantee regulatory compliance. Your 
organization's information security experts should identify the standards-based products that will best 
integrate with your existing tools and IT system infrastructure. Your company can adopt this solution or 
one that adheres to these guidelines in whole, or you can use this guide as a starting point for tailoring 
and implementing parts of a solution. 
2 How to Use This Guide 
This National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Cybersecurity Practice Guide demonstrates a 
standards-based reference design and provides users with the information they need to replicate all or 
parts of the build created in the NCCoE ITAM Lab. This reference design is modular and can be deployed 
in whole or in part. 
This guide contains three volumes: 
▪ NIST SP 1800-5A: Executive Summary 
▪ NIST SP 1800-5B: Approach, Architecture, and Security Characteristics – what we built and why 
(you are here) 
▪ NIST SP 1800-5C: How-To Guides – instructions for building the example solution 
Depending on your role in your organization, you might use this guide in different ways: 
Financial services sector leaders, including chief security and technology officers, will be interested in 
the Executive Summary, NIST SP 1800-5A, which describes the following topics: 
▪ challenges that financial services sector organizations face in implementing and using ITAM 
systems 
▪ example solution built at the NCCoE 
▪ benefits of adopting a secure, centralized ITAM system, and the risks of a lack of visibility into 
networked IT assets 
4 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Technology or security program managers who are concerned with how to identify, understand, assess, 
and mitigate risk will be interested in this part of the guide, NIST SP 1800-5B, which describes what we 
did and why. The following sections will be of particular interest: 
▪ Section 4.5, Risk Assessment and Mitigation, where we identify the steps we took to protect and 
monitor the ITAM system 
▪ Section 4.5.1, Assessing Risk Posture, where we identify the security measures used in this 
implementation 
▪ Section 4.5.2, Security Characteristics and Controls Mapping, where we map the security 
characteristics of this example solution to cybersecurity standards and best practices 
▪ Section 4.6, Technologies, where we identify the products and technologies we used and map 
them to the relevant security controls 
You might share the Executive Summary, NIST SP 1800-5A, with your leadership team members to help 
them understand the importance of adopting standards-based IT Asset Management (ITAM) which is 
foundational to an effective cybersecurity strategy and is prominently featured in the SANS Critical 
Security Controls [1] and NIST Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity [2]. 
IT professionals who want to implement an approach like this will find the whole practice guide useful. 
You can use the How-To portion of the guide, NIST SP 1800-5C, to replicate all or parts of the build 
created in our lab. The How-To portion of the guide provides specific product installation, configuration, 
and integration instructions for implementing the example solution. We do not recreate the product 
manufacturers’ documentation, which is generally widely available. Rather, we show how we 
incorporated the products together in our environment to create an example solution. 
This guide assumes that IT professionals have experience implementing security products in financial 
services sector organizations. While we have used a suite of commercial products to address this 
challenge, this guide does not endorse these particular products. Your organization can adopt this 
solution or one that adheres to these guidelines in whole, or you can use this guide as a starting point 
for tailoring and implementing parts of IT Asset Management (ITAM) which is foundational to an 
effective cybersecurity strategy and is prominently featured in the SANS Critical Security Controls [1] and 
NIST Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity [2]. Your organization’s security 
experts should identify the products that will best integrate with your existing tools and IT system 
infrastructure. We hope that you will seek products that are congruent with applicable standards and 
best practices. Section 4.6, Technologies, lists the products we used and maps them to the cybersecurity 
controls provided by this reference solution. 
A NIST Cybersecurity Practice Guide does not describe “the” solution, but a possible solution. 
Comments, suggestions, and success stories will improve subsequent versions of this guide. Please 
contribute your thoughts to financial_nccoe@nist.gov, and join the discussion at 
http://nccoe.nist.gov/forums/financial-services. 
5 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
2.1 Typographic Conventions 
The following table presents typographic conventions used in this volume. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Typeface/Symbol 
Meaning 
Example 
Italics 
file names and path names; 
references to documents that 
are not hyperlinks; new 
terms; and placeholders 
For detailed definitions of terms, see 
the NCCoE Glossary. 
Bold 
names of menus, options, 
command buttons, and fields 
Choose File > Edit. 
Monospace 
command-line input, 
on-screen computer output, 
sample code examples, and 
status codes 
mkdir 
Monospace Bold 
command-line user input 
contrasted with computer 
output 
service sshd start 
blue text 
link to other parts of the 
document, a web URL, or an 
email address 
All publications from NIST’s NCCoE 
are available at 
https://www.nccoe.nist.gov. 
3 Introduction 
In order for financial services sector institutions to make informed, business-driven decisions regarding 
their assets, they must first know what assets they possess, and their status. This information provides 
the visibility into license utilization, software support costs, unauthorized devices, vulnerabilities, and 
compliance. IT assets include items such as servers, desktops, laptops, and network appliances. 
Technology and policy constraints make it difficult to collect and analyze IT asset data in a large enterprise 
composed of multiple organizations (subsidiaries and partners) spread out over diverse geographic 
locations. 
While many financial services sector companies label physical assets with bar codes and track them in a 
database, this approach does not answer questions such as, “What operating systems are our laptops 
running?” and “Which devices are vulnerable to the latest threat?” The goal of this project is to create an 
integrated system that can quickly provide answers to questions like these by connecting existing 
systems for physical assets, physical security, IT systems, and network security into a comprehensive 
ITAM system. Another key consideration is the need for companies to demonstrate compliance with 
industry and regulatory standards. 
6 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
In our lab at the NCCoE, we constructed an ITAM solution that spans traditional physical asset tracking, 
IT asset information, physical security, and vulnerability and compliance information. Users can now 
query one ITAM system and gain insight into all four of these types of information regarding their entire 
IT asset portfolio. 
Financial sector companies can employ this ITAM system to dynamically apply business and security 
rules to better utilize information assets and protect enterprise systems and data. In short, the ITAM 
system described in this practice guide gives companies the ability to monitor and report on an IT asset 
throughout its entire life cycle, thereby reducing the total cost of ownership by reducing the number of 
man-hours needed to perform tasks such as incident response and system patching. 
4 Approach 
4.1 Audience 
This guide is intended for individuals responsible for implementing IT security solutions in financial 
services organizations. Current decentralized systems often require connecting to multiple systems 
(assuming you have access), performing multiple queries, and then assembling a report. This centralized 
ITAM system provides data and metadata analysis, data aggregation, and reporting and alerting, all from 
an automated platform. The technical components will appeal to system administrators, IT managers, IT 
security managers, and others directly involved in the secure and safe operation of business operations 
and IT networks. 
4.2 Scope 
The scope of this guide encompasses the implementation of numerous products to centralize IT asset 
management. The scope concentrates on centralizing the following capabilities: 
1. receiving a new physical IT asset 
2. transferring a physical IT asset 
3. migrating a virtual machine 
4. detecting, preventing, and responding to incidents 
5. continuously monitoring for unapproved hardware and software 
6. continuously monitoring for vulnerabilities and applying corporate-approved patches/updates 
The objective is to perform all of the above actions using a centralized system with interfaces designed 
for each task. 
7 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
4.3 Assumptions 
This project is guided by the assumptions described in the following subsections. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
4.3.1 Security 
This ITAM system provides numerous security benefits including increased visibility and faster 
remediation. We assert that the benefits of using this ITAM system outweigh any additional risks that 
may be introduced. A key assumption is that all potential adopters of the build or any of its components 
already have system and network security in place. Therefore, we focused on what potential new 
vulnerabilities were being introduced to systems if the solution (or any part of the solution) was 
implemented. One of the goals of this solution is to not introduce additional vulnerabilities, however 
there are always risks when adding systems, or adding new features into an existing system. 
4.3.2 Modularity 
Financial services sector companies already have ITAM solution(s) in place. Our philosophy is that a 
combination of certain components or a single component can improve ITAM functions for an 
organization, and that they need not remove or replace existing infrastructure. This guide provides a 
complete top-to-bottom solution and is also intended to provide various options based on need. 
4.3.3 Technical Implementation 
This practice guide is written from a “how-to” perspective, and its foremost purpose is to provide details 
on how to install, configure, and integrate the components. The NCCoE assumes that an organization has 
the technical resources to implement all or parts of the build, or has access to companies that can 
perform the implementation on its behalf. 
4.3.4 Tracking and Location 
The ITAM system described in this guide can provide an organization with location information for 
specific assets. This location information is typically in the form of building, room number, rack number, 
etc. The location information is usually manually entered into one or more asset databases. The location 
information in this project is not obtained via the global positioning system or other wireless/radio 
frequency tracking. 
4.3.5 Operating Systems 
This project uses Ubuntu Linux, CentOS Linux, RedHat Enterprise Linux, Windows Server 2012R2, and 
Windows 7 operating systems. Operating systems were chosen based on the requirements of the 
software. For example, BelManage and CA ITAM need to run on Windows 2012R2. 
8 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Operating systems were securely configured based on the Department of Defense standard 
configuration guidance known as the Security Technical Implementation Guidelines (STIGs) and Security 
Requirements guides. They are publicly available at http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/Pages/index.aspx. Each 
STIG includes a set of rules and guidelines for configuring the operating system implementation. For 
example, the Microsoft Windows 2012R2 STIG (http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/os/windows/Pages/index.aspx) 
was used to configure the Windows servers used in the build. The specific percentage of STIG 
compliance for each operating system used in the build is listed in NIST SP 1800-5C of this publication, 
How-To Guides. Note that the lab instantiation of the build did not require or allow implementation of 
every rule and guide in each STIG. 
4.4 Constraints 
This project has the constraints described in the following subsections. 
4.4.1 Limited Scalability Testing 
The NCCoE is a laboratory environment and is, therefore, constrained in terms of replicating a sizeable 
user base, such as that in most financial services sector companies. However, the products used in the 
build do not have that constraint and are designed for enterprise deployments. 
4.4.2 Limited Assets 
The NCCoE lab has access to a limited number and variety of IT assets. The assets at the NCCoE were 
included in the ITAM system, and the components used in the build do not have a limitation on the 
amount or variety of assets. 
4.4.3 Mobile Devices 
Due to scoping constraints, mobile devices were not included in the ITAM project. The NCCoE has 
several other projects dealing with mobile device security and management that can be used in 
conjunction with this ITAM project. For more information, please visit the NCCoE’s Mobile Device 
Security project page: https://nccoe.nist.gov/projects/building_blocks/mobile_device_security. 
4.4.4 Network Devices 
The ITAM lab is almost totally composed of virtual machines. Some of the virtual machines are 
performing the duties of network devices, such as routers, firewalls, and switches. Where possible, the 
configurations and data collected by these devices are used by the ITAM system. 
9 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
4.4.5 Limited Replication of Enterprise Network 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
The NCCoE was able to replicate the physical asset, physical security, IT systems, and network security 
silos in a limited manner. The goal was to demonstrate both logically and physically that functions could 
be performed from a centralized ITAM system regardless of where it is located in the enterprise. In a 
real-world environment, the interconnections between the silos are fully dependent on the business 
needs and compliance requirements of the individual enterprise. We did not attempt to replicate these 
interconnections. Rather, we acknowledge that implementing the project build or its components would 
create new interfaces across silos. We focused on providing general information on how to remain within 
the bounds of compliance should the build be adopted. 
4.5 Risk Assessment and Mitigation 
NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-30, Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments [6], states that risk is “a 
measure of the extent to which an entity is threatened by a potential circumstance or event, and 
typically a function of (i) the adverse impacts that would arise if the circumstance or event occurs and 
(ii) the likelihood of occurrence.” The guide further defines risk assessment as “the process of 
identifying, estimating, and prioritizing risks to organizational operations (including mission, functions, 
image, reputation), organizational assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation, resulting 
from the operation of an information system. Part of risk management incorporates threat and 
vulnerability analyses, and considers mitigations provided by security controls planned or in place.” 
The NCCoE recommends that any discussion of risk management, particularly at the enterprise level, 
begins with a comprehensive review of NIST SP 800-37, Guide for Applying the Risk Management 
Framework to Federal Information Systems [7]—material that is available to the public. The risk 
management framework (RMF) guidance, as a whole, proved to be invaluable in giving us a baseline to 
assess risks, from which we developed the project, the security characteristics of the build, and this 
guide. 
We performed two types of risk assessment: the initial analysis of the risk posed to the financial sector, 
which led to the creation of the use case and the desired security characteristics, and an analysis to 
show users how to manage the cybersecurity risk to the components introduced by adoption of the 
solution. 
In order to effectively enforce and audit security policy, an organization must first know what 
equipment and software are present. For example, knowing what hardware and software are present is 
the first step to enabling application whitelisting or blacklisting, and network access controls. The ability 
to view the status and configuration of everything in an organization from one centralized location is a 
very powerful tool that could result in disaster if it were to fall into the wrong hands. Therefore, the 
ITAM system must be extremely well protected and monitored. In response, we implemented access 
controls, network access restrictions, network monitoring, secure data transmission, configuration 
10 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
management, and user activity monitoring. Section 4.5.2 provides a security evaluation of the 
architecture and a list of the security characteristics. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
4.5.1 Assessing Risk Posture 
Using the guidance in NIST's series of publications concerning the RMF, the NCCoE performed two key 
activities to identify the most compelling risks encountered by organizations within the financial sector. 
The first was a face-to-face meeting with members of the financial sector community to define the main 
security risks to business operations. This meeting identified a primary risk concern: the lack of a 
converged view and reporting capability for IT assets. We then identified the core risk area, ITAM, and 
established the core operational risks encountered daily in this area. The following associated tactical 
risks were identified: 
▪ lack of knowledge of the IT asset locations 
▪ lack of configuration controls for IT assets 
▪ ineffective patch management 
▪ lack of software vulnerability management 
▪ lack of a common operating picture of the enterprise's IT assets 
▪ lack of a converged repository of IT assets 
The phone interviews with members of the financial sector gave us a better understanding of the 
business risks as they relate to the potential cost and business value. NIST SP 800-39, Managing 
Information Security Risk [8], focuses particularly on the business aspect of risk, namely at the 
enterprise level. This foundation is essential for any further risk analysis, risk response/mitigation, and 
risk monitoring activities. The following is a summary of the strategic risks: 
▪ impact on service delivery – ensuring people have access to systems needed to perform their 
job functions in the security operations organization 
▪ cost of implementation – implementing ITAM once and using it across all systems may reduce 
both system management and operational costs. Reuse of existing systems where possible 
▪ budget expenditure as it relates to investment in security technologies 
▪ projected cost savings and operational efficiencies to be gained as a result of new investment in 
security 
▪ compliance with existing industry standards – FFIEC CAT requires deliberate and timely control 
of IT assets. 
▪ high-quality reputation or public image 
▪ risk of alternative or no action 
11 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Undertaking these activities in accordance with the NIST RMF guidance yielded the necessary 
operational and strategic risk information, which was subsequently translated to security characteristics. 
Table 4-1 illustrates the mapping of these characteristics to NIST's SP 800-53 Rev. 4 [3] controls, along 
with the Cybersecurity Assessment Tool (CAT) and other security controls and best practices. 
Implementing these security controls will substantially lower overall cyber-risk by providing mitigations 
against known cyber threats. Having a comprehensive ITAM system in place, like the one in this 
document, enables the effective implementation of other mitigations such as application 
whitelisting/blacklisting, and network access controls. A full list of the security technologies used to 
implement this reference architecture can be found in Table 4-2. 
4.5.2 Security Characteristics and Controls Mapping 
Table 4-1 maps the project’s security characteristics to the NIST Framework for Improving Critical 
Infrastructure Cybersecurity (CSF), relevant NIST standards, Federal Financial Institution Examination 
Council Cybersecurity Assessment Tool (FFIEC CAT), and best practices. The mapping in Table 4-1 comes 
from the white paper we drafted when we initially defined this challenge [9]. 
12 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 13 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Table 4-1 Security Characteristics and Controls Mapping 
 Cybersecurity Standards and Best Practices Financial Sector 
Best Practices 
Security Characteristics 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Function [2] 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Category [2] 
Cybersecurity Framework 
Subcategory [2] 
NIST 800-53 
[3] 
IEC/ISO27001 
[10] FFIEC CAT 
complement existing 
asset management, se
curity, and network sys
tems 
Identify Business Envi
ronment 
 
 
 
 
ID.BE-4 Dependencies and criti
cal functions for delivery of crit
ical services are established 
SA-14  D1.G.IT.B.2 
 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 14 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
 Cybersecurity Standards and Best Practices Financial Sector 
Best Practices 
Security Characteristics 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Function [2] 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Category [2] 
Cybersecurity Framework 
Subcategory [2] 
NIST 800-53 
[3] 
IEC/ISO27001 
[10] FFIEC CAT 
Protect Access Con
trol 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PR.AC-5: Network integrity is 
protected, incorporating net
work segregation where appro
priate 
AC-4, AC-16 A.13.1.1, 
A.13.1.3, 
A.13.2.1 
D3.DC.Im.B.1, 
D3.DC.Im.Int.1 
 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 15 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
 Cybersecurity Standards and Best Practices Financial Sector 
Best Practices 
Security Characteristics 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Function [2] 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Category [2] 
Cybersecurity Framework 
Subcategory [2] 
NIST 800-53 
[3] 
IEC/ISO27001 
[10] FFIEC CAT 
provide APIs for com
municating with other 
security devices and 
systems such as fire
walls and intrusion de
tection and identity and 
access management 
(IDAM) systems 
Detect Anomalies 
and Events 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DE.AE-3: Event data are aggre
gated and correlated from mul
tiple sources and sensors 
AU-6, CA-7, 
IR-5, SI-4 
 D3.DC.Ev.E.1 
 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 16 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
 Cybersecurity Standards and Best Practices Financial Sector 
Best Practices 
Security Characteristics 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Function [2] 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Category [2] 
Cybersecurity Framework 
Subcategory [2] 
NIST 800-53 
[3] 
IEC/ISO27001 
[10] FFIEC CAT 
Detect Detection 
Processes 
 
 
 
 
 
DE.DP-4: Event detection infor
mation is communicated to ap
propriate parties 
AU-6, CA-7, 
RA-5, SI-4 
A.16.1.2 D3.DC.Ev.B.2, 
D5.ER.Is.B.1, 
D5.ER.Is.E.1 
know and control which 
assets, both virtual and 
physical, are connected 
Identify Asset Man
agement 
ID.AM-1: Physical devices and 
systems within the organization 
are inventoried 
CA-7 A.8.1.1 D1.G.IT.B.1 
Identify Asset Man
agement 
ID.AM-2: Software platforms 
and applications within the or
ganization are inventoried 
CM-8, SA-14, 
CA-7, CM-8, 
PE-20, SI-4 
A.8.1.1 D1.G.IT.B.1 
 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 17 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
 Cybersecurity Standards and Best Practices Financial Sector 
Best Practices 
Security Characteristics 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Function [2] 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Category [2] 
Cybersecurity Framework 
Subcategory [2] 
NIST 800-53 
[3] 
IEC/ISO27001 
[10] FFIEC CAT 
to the enterprise net
work 
Identify Asset Man
agement 
ID.AM-5: Resources are priori
tized based on their classifica
tion, criticality and business 
value 
IA-3 A.8.2.1 D1.G.IT.B.2 
Detect Security Con
tinuous Moni
toring 
DE.CM-7: Monitoring for unau
thorized personnel, connec
tions, devices and software is 
performed 
PE-6, SC-7, 
SC-30, SC-32 
 D3.DC.Ev.B.3 
detect and alert when 
unauthorized devices 
attempt to access the 
network 
Detect Anomalies 
and Events 
DE.AE-3: Event data are aggre
gated and correlated from mul
tiple sources and sensors 
AU-2, AU-6, 
CA-7, IR-4, 
IR-5, SI-4 
 D3.DC.Ev.E.1 
Detect Security Con
tinuous Moni
toring 
DE.CM-1: The network is moni
tored to detect potential cyber
security events 
AU-12, CA-7, 
SC-7, SI-4 
 D3.DC.An.B.2 
 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 18 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
 Cybersecurity Standards and Best Practices Financial Sector 
Best Practices 
Security Characteristics 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Function [2] 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Category [2] 
Cybersecurity Framework 
Subcategory [2] 
NIST 800-53 
[3] 
IEC/ISO27001 
[10] FFIEC CAT 
Detect Security Con
tinuous Moni
toring 
DE.CM-7: Monitoring for unau
thorized personnel, connec
tions, devices and software is 
performed 
CM-8, PE-6, 
PE-20, SI-4, 
AU-12 
 D3.DC.Ev.B.3 
Protect Protective 
Technology 
PR.PT-1: Audit/log records are 
determined, documented, im
plemented and reviewed in ac
cordance with policy 
IA-3, IR-6 A.12.4.1, 
A.12.4.3 
D1.G.SP.B.3, 
D2.MA.Ma.B.1, 
D2.MA.Ma.B.2 
integrate with ways to 
validate a trusted net
work connection 
Identify Asset Man
agement 
ID.AM-2: Software platforms 
and applications within the or
ganization are inventoried 
AU-2 A.8.1.1 D1.G.IT.B.1 
Identify Asset Man
agement 
ID.AM-5: Resources are priori
tized based on their classifica
tion, criticality and business 
value 
CM-8, CA-7 A.8.1.1 D1.G.IT.B.1 
 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 19 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
 Cybersecurity Standards and Best Practices Financial Sector 
Best Practices 
Security Characteristics 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Function [2] 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Category [2] 
Cybersecurity Framework 
Subcategory [2] 
NIST 800-53 
[3] 
IEC/ISO27001 
[10] FFIEC CAT 
Identify Asset Man
agement 
ID.AM-5: Resources are priori
tized based on their classifica
tion, criticality and business 
value 
SA-14, IA-3 A.8.2.1 D1.G.IT.B.2 
Protect Protective 
Technology 
PR.PT-1: Audit/log records are 
determined, documented, im
plemented, and reviewed in ac
cordance with policy 
AU-6, IR-5, 
IR-6 
A.12.4.1, 
A.12.4.3 
D1.G.SP.B.3 
Protect Data Security PR.DS-2: Data-in-transit is pro
tected 
SC-8 A.13.1.1, 
A.13.2.1, 
A.14.1.2 
D3.PC.Am.B.13, 
D3.PC.Am.E.5, 
D3.PC.Am.Int.7 
Detect Security Con
tinuous Moni
toring 
DE.CM-7: Monitoring for unau
thorized personnel, connec
tions, devices and software is 
performed 
AU-12, CA-7, 
CM-8, PE-3, 
PE-6, PE-20,  
SI-4 
 D3.DC.Ev.B.3 
 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 20 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
 Cybersecurity Standards and Best Practices Financial Sector 
Best Practices 
Security Characteristics 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Function [2] 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Category [2] 
Cybersecurity Framework 
Subcategory [2] 
NIST 800-53 
[3] 
IEC/ISO27001 
[10] FFIEC CAT 
Respond Communica
tions 
RS.CO-2: Events are reported 
consistent with established cri
teria 
AU-6, IR-6 A.16.1.2 D5.IR.Pl.B.2, 
D5.DR.Re.B.4, 
D5.DR.Re.E.6, 
D5.ER.Es.B.4 
enable administrators 
to define and control 
the hardware and soft
ware that can be con
nected to the corporate 
environment 
Identify Asset Man
agement 
ID.AM-1: Physical devices and 
systems within the organization 
are inventoried 
CM-8, IA-3 A.8.1.1 D1.G.IT.B.1 
Identify Asset Man
agement 
ID.AM-2: Software platforms 
and applications within the or
ganization are inventoried 
CM-8 A.8.1.1 D1.G.IT.B.1 
Detect Security Con
tinuous Moni
toring 
DE.CM-7: Monitoring for unau
thorized personnel, connec
tions, devices and software is 
performed 
AU-12, CA-7, 
CM-8, PE-3, 
PE-6, PE-20, 
SI-4 
 D3.DC.Ev.B.3 
enforce software re
striction policies relat
ing to what software is 
Protect Access Con
trol 
PR.AC-1: Identities and creden
tials are managed for author
ized devices, users (and soft
ware) 
CM-2, IA-3  D3.PC.Im.B.7, 
D3.PC.Am.B.6 
 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 21 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
 Cybersecurity Standards and Best Practices Financial Sector 
Best Practices 
Security Characteristics 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Function [2] 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Category [2] 
Cybersecurity Framework 
Subcategory [2] 
NIST 800-53 
[3] 
IEC/ISO27001 
[10] FFIEC CAT 
allowed to run in the 
corporate environment 
Protect Protective 
Technology 
PR.PT-1: Audit/log records are 
determined, documented, im
plemented, and reviewed in ac
cordance with policy 
AU-6, IR-5, 
IR-6 
A.12.4.1, 
A.12.4.3 
D1.G.SP.B.3, 
D2.MA.Ma.B.1, 
D2.MA.Ma.B.2 
Detect Security Con
tinuous Moni
toring 
DE.CM-7: Monitoring for unau
thorized personnel, connec
tions, devices and software is 
performed 
AU-12, CA-7, 
CM-8, PE-3, 
PE-6, PE-20, 
SI-4 
 D3.DC.Ev.B.3 
Identify Risk Assess
ment 
ID.RA-1: Asset vulnerabilities 
are identified and documented. 
CA-7, CA-8, 
RA-5, SI-2, 
SI-4, SI-5 
A.12.6.1, 
A.18.2.3 
D2.TI.Ti.B.2, 
D1.RM.RA.E.2 
Identify Risk Assess
ment 
ID.RA-2: Threat and vulnerabil
ity information is received from 
information sharing forums and 
sources 
PM-15, SI-5 A.6.1.4 D2.TI.Ti.B.1 
Respond Mitigate Vul
nerabilities 
RS.MI-3: Newly identified vul
nerabilities are mitigated or 
documented as accepted risks 
CA-7, RA-5 A.12.6.1 D1.RM.RA.E.1 
 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 22 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
 Cybersecurity Standards and Best Practices Financial Sector 
Best Practices 
Security Characteristics 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Function [2] 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Category [2] 
Cybersecurity Framework 
Subcategory [2] 
NIST 800-53 
[3] 
IEC/ISO27001 
[10] FFIEC CAT 
record and track the 
prescribed attributes of 
assets 
Detect Security Con
tinuous Moni
toring 
DE.CM-7 Monitoring for unau
thorized personnel, connec
tions, devices, and software is 
performed 
AU-12, CA-7, 
CM-8, PE-20, 
SI-4 
 D3.DC.Ev.B.3 
audit and monitor 
changes in the asset’s 
state and connection 
Detect Security Con
tinuous Moni
toring 
DE.CM-7: Monitoring for unau
thorized personnel, connec
tions, devices and software is 
performed 
AU-12, CA-7, 
CM-8, PE-20, 
SI-4 
 D3.DC.Ev.B.3 
Protect Protective 
Technology 
PR.PT-1: Audit/log records are 
determined, documented, im
plemented, and reviewed in ac
cordance with policy 
AU-6, IR-5, 
IR-6, SI-4 
A.12.4.1, 
A.12.4.3 
D1.G.SP.B.3, 
D2.MA.Ma.B.1, 
D2.MA.Ma.B.2 
integrate with log anal
ysis tools to collect and 
store audited infor
mation 
Protect Protective 
Technology 
PR.PT-1: Audit/log records are 
determined, documented, im
plemented, and reviewed in ac
cordance with policy 
AU-6, IR-5, 
IR-6, SI-4 
A.12.4.1, 
A.12.4.3 
D1.G.SP.B.3, 
D2.MA.Ma.B.1, 
D2.MA.Ma.B.2 
 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 23 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
 Cybersecurity Standards and Best Practices Financial Sector 
Best Practices 
Security Characteristics 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Function [2] 
Cybersecurity 
Framework 
Category [2] 
Cybersecurity Framework 
Subcategory [2] 
NIST 800-53 
[3] 
IEC/ISO27001 
[10] FFIEC CAT 
does not introduce new 
attack vectors into ex
isting systems 
Detect Security Con
tinuous Moni
toring 
DE.CM-8: Vulnerability scans 
are performed 
RA-5 12.6.1 D3.DC.Th.E.5 
4.6 Technologies 
Table 4-2 lists all of the technologies used in this project and provides a mapping among the generic application term, the specific product used, 
and the security control(s) that the product provides. The Architecture Location column refers to Figure 5-4, ITAM Build. 
Table 4-2 Products and Technologies 
Company Product Version Architecture 
Location Use CSF 
Subcategory 
NIST 800-53 
rev4 Controls 
AlphaPoint 
Technology 
AssetCentral 2.1.1 
Build 1157 
Physical 
Asset Mgmt. 
Stores and displays information on all 
physical assets in a data center. 
ID.AM-1 CM-8 
RedJack Fathom 1.8.0 DMZ Collects and analyzes NetFlow data 
and unencrypted banner information 
from network traffic to detect ma
chines and anomalies. 
DE.CM-1 AU-12, CA7, 
SC-7, SI-4 
 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 24 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Company Product Version Architecture 
Location Use CSF 
Subcategory 
NIST 800-53 
rev4 Controls 
N/A (open 
source) 
Bro 2.3.2 DMZ Monitors the network and reports on 
all connections. Also analyzes known 
bad IP addresses and misconfigured 
network settings. 
DE.CM-1 AU-12, CA-7, 
SC-7, SI-4 
N/A (open 
source) 
Snort 2.9.6.0 DMZ Examines network traffic and gener
ates alerts based on signatures of 
known security issues. 
DE.CM-1 AU-12, CA-7, 
SC-7, SI-4 
Belarc BelManage 8.1.31 Network 
Security 
Collects information on the operating 
system and installed software. 
ID.AM-1 CM-8 
ID.AM-2 CM-8 
DE.CM-7 AU-12, CA-7, 
CM-2, CM-3, 
CM-8, PE-3,  
PE-6, PE-20,  
SI-4 
Belarc BelManage 
Analytics 
N/A Network 
Security 
Provides query capability and auto
mated analytics for BelManage data. 
DE.CM-7 AU-12, CA-7, 
CM-2, CM-3, 
CM-8, PE-3,  
PE-6, PE-20,  
SI-4 
PuppetLabs Puppet 8.3 IT Systems Provides configuration management, 
enforcement and validation. 
RS.MI-2 IR-4 
ID.AM-2 CM-8 
Company 
Product 
Version 
Architecture 
Location 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
N/A (open 
source) 
OpenVAS 
4.0.1 
Network 
Security 
Use 
CSF 
Subcategory 
NIST 800-53 
rev4 Controls 
ID.RA-1 
Splunk 
Splunk 
Enterprise 
6.2 
ITAM 
Scans machines for known vulnerabili
ties. 
DE.CM-8 
RA-5 
CA-7, CA-8, 
RA-5, SI-2, SI-4, 
SI-5 
ID.RA-2 PM-15, PM-16, 
SI-5 
ID.AM-2 CM-8 
Microsoft 
WSUS 
6.3.9600.1747 
7 
DMZ 
Collects, stores and analyzes the IT as
set data. 
ID.AM-1 
CM-8 
DE.AE-3 
AU-6, CA-7, 
IR-4, IR-5, IR-8, 
SI-4 
Provides patches and updates to Mi
crosoft Windows machines. 
Ubuntu 
Apt-Cache 
Apt 
1.0.1ubuntu2 
DMZ 
RS.MI-2 
IR-4 
Provides patches and updates to Ub
untu Linux machines. 
CA 
Technologies 
ITAM  
Physical 
Asset Mgmt. 
Provides physical asset management. 
RS:MI-2 
IR-4 
ID.AM-1 
Tyco 
iStar Edge  
Physical 
Security 
Provides physical access management. PR.AC-1 
CM-8 
AC-2, IA Family 
N/A (open 
source) 
Openswan 
U2.6.38 
DMZ 
Provides secure access and transport 
to the off-site mainframe computer. 
PR.DS-2 
SC-3 
25 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
Company 
Product 
Version 
Architecture 
Location 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
N/A (open 
source) 
pfSense 
2.2.2 
All 
(6 instances) 
Use 
CSF 
Subcategory 
NIST 800-53 
rev4 Controls 
Provides routing and network segrega
tion between all network segments. 
Vanguard 
Integrity 
Professionals 
Security 
Manager 
N/A 
External 
Provides security alert information 
from mainframe assets 
PR.AC-5 
AC-4, SC-7 
ID.AM-1, 
ID.AM-2 
Microsoft 
Server 
2012R2 
Certificate 
Authority 
Server2012R2 IT Systems 
Provide certificates and PKI manage
ment. 
CM-8 
PR.AC-1: Iden
tities and cre
dentials are 
managed. 
AC-2, IA Family 
26 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
5 Architecture 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
5.1 Reference Architecture Description 
ITAM refers to a set of policies and procedures that an organization uses to track, audit, and monitor the 
state of its IT assets, and maintain system configurations. These assets include “… computing device, 
information technology (IT) system, IT network, IT circuit, software (both an installed instance and a 
physical instance), virtual computing platform (common in cloud and virtualized computing), and related 
hardware (e.g., locks, cabinets, keyboards)” [11]. The cybersecurity value of ITAM is derived from some 
key aspects of the Risk Management Framework [12] and the NIST Framework for Improving Critical 
Infrastructure Cybersecurity [2], including: 
▪ selection and application of baseline security controls 
▪ continuous monitoring and reporting of asset status to a data store 
▪ implementation of anomaly detection mechanisms. Examples include deviations from normal 
network traffic or deviations from established configuration baselines 
▪ provision of context to detected anomalies and cybersecurity events within the reporting and 
analytic engine 
Implementing the first two elements above addresses the Select, Implement, and Monitor aspects of 
the Risk Management Framework by providing a method to select a baseline, implement it (both 
configuration and enforcement), and detect changes in the baseline. ITAM addresses the Identify, 
Protect, Detect, and Respond aspects of the NIST Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure 
Cybersecurity [2] by implementing the last two bullets, which identify anomalies and add context to 
events, aiding in remediation. 
The ITAM processes supported by our reference architecture include data collection, data storage, 
configuration management, policy enforcement, data analytics, and reporting/visualization. The 
reference architecture is depicted in Figure 5-1. 
27 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
Figure 5-1 Reference Architecture 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Figure 5-2, ITAM Reference Functionality, shows how data flows through the ITAM system. Tier 3 is 
composed of enterprise assets themselves. Tier 3 is made up of all of the assets being tracked including 
hardware, software, and virtual machines. Tier 2 includes the sensors and independent systems that 
feed data into the enterprise ITAM system. Tier 2 systems include passive and active collection sensor 
and agents. Tier 1 is the enterprise ITAM system that provides the aggregation of data from all Tier 2 
systems into business and security intelligence. 
28 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
Figure 5-2 ITAM Reference Functionality 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
The following capabilities are demonstrated in the ITAM build (see Figure 5-2, ITAM Reference 
Functionality): 
▪ Data Collection is the capability to enumerate and report the unique software and system 
configuration of each asset and transfer that information to the Data Storage capability. 
▪ Data Storage is the capability that receives data from the data collection capability, re-formats as 
needed, and stores the data in a storage system. 
▪ Data Analytics is the capability that performs analytic functions on the data made available by 
the Data Storage capability. 
▪ Corporate Governance and Policies are all of the rules that are placed upon the IT assets. These 
rules can include the network/web sites that employees can visit, what software can be installed, 
and what network services are allowed. 
▪ Configuration Management Systems enforce Corporate Governance and Policies through 
actions such as applying software patches and updates, removing blacklisted software, and 
automatically updating configurations. 
▪ Reporting and Visualizations is the capability that generates human-readable graphical and 
numerical tables of information provided by the Data Analytics capability. 
29 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
All six are “run-time” capabilities in that they happen periodically in an automated fashion. After 
performing the initial configuration and manually entering the asset into the asset database, most tasks 
are performed automatically. Analysts are required to perform a periodic review of the reports stored in 
the analytic engine to determine anomalies and perform remediation. 
The architecture for this project correlates asset management information with security and event 
management information in order to provide context to events, intrusions, attacks, and anomalies on 
the network. It consists of processes and technologies that enable the enrollment, tracking and 
monitoring of assets throughout the enterprise. Furthermore, it provides processes to detect unenrolled 
or untrusted assets within the enterprise. 
Figure 5-3 Typical Asset Lifecycle [13] 
In a typical lifecycle, an asset goes through the enrollment, operation, and end-of-life phases. 
Enrollment usually involves manual activities performed by IT staff such as assigning and tagging the 
asset with a serial number and barcode, loading a baseline IT image, assigning the asset to an owner, 
and, finally, recording the serial number as well as other attributes into a database. The attributes might 
also include primary location, hardware model, baseline IT image, and owner. 
As the asset goes through the operations phase, changes can occur. Such changes could include 
introduction of new or unauthorized software, the removal of certain critical software, or the removal of 
the physical asset itself from the enterprise. These changes need to be tracked and recorded. As a 
30 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
consequence, asset monitoring, anomaly detection, reporting, and policy enforcement are the primary 
activities in this phase. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
The assets within the enterprise are monitored using installed agents that reside on the asset, as well as 
network-based monitoring systems that scan and capture network traffic. These monitoring systems 
collect data from and about the assets and send periodic reports to the analytics engine. Each 
monitoring system sends reports with slightly differing emphasis on aspects of these enterprise assets. 
Reports are collected regarding installed and licensed software, vulnerabilities, anomalous traffic (i.e. 
traffic to new sites or drastic changes in the volume of traffic), and policy enforcement status. 
As an asset reaches the end of its operational life, it goes through activities within the end-of-life phase 
that include returning the asset to IT support for data removal and removing the serial number from the 
registration database and other associated databases. Finally, the asset is prepared for physical removal 
from the enterprise facility. 
The ITAM workflow calls for enrolling the asset once it is received, assigning and recording a serial 
number, loading a base IT image with a list of approved software, including configuration management 
agents and asset management agents that start monitoring, and reporting on the assets once enrolled. 
These software agents collect information previously defined by administrators. 
A security and configuration baseline is enforced by configuration management agents, installed 
software is captured by software asset management agents, and both categories of agents forward 
reports to their respective servers, which serve as data storage facilities. The servers format the data in 
a suitable form prior to forwarding these periodic reports to the analytics engine. With the visualization 
capability of the analytics engine, an analyst or manager can retrieve a visual report with the 
appropriate level of specificity. Changes that affect the asset attributes are captured in these reports 
sent to the analytics engine. While the ITAM system does provide some automated anomaly detection, 
analysts should periodically review reports to determine anomalies or relevant changes that may have 
occurred. Views with specific information about the assets are defined within the analytics engine, 
enabling analysts to detect policy violations or anomalies that could warrant further investigation. Alerts 
from other security information sources are also triggers for more detailed investigations by an analyst. 
Detection of policy violations triggers policy enforcement or remediation if a relevant and negative alert 
was detected. These alerts could include, but are not limited to, newly discovered vulnerabilities or the 
discovery of blacklisted software. The configuration management facility would be used to enforce the 
removal of such software or the patching of the vulnerability on any number of hosts, bringing the 
enterprise into a more compliant state as defined by enterprise policy. 
31 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
5.2 Reference Architecture Relationship 
This ITAM project presents the following four scenarios: 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
1. A new laptop is purchased: the ITAM system will track the laptop from arrival, through 
configuration, and to its new owner. The laptop will continue to be monitored during its lifecycle. 
2. A server is transferred from one department to another. The ITAM system is used to update the 
physical asset system and the server itself. 
3. A virtual machine migrates between physical servers. The ITAM system is notified of all 
migrations and can alert if a policy violation occurs. 
4. Incident detection, response, and prevention: If a sensor, such as an intrusion detection system, 
triggers an alert, the ITAM system should provide additional information on that asset such as 
configuration, location, and ownership, if possible. 
The ITAM system ties into the existing silos of physical assets, physical security, IT systems, and network 
security to provide a comprehensive view of all assets in the enterprise. This view allows for queries, 
dashboards, and process automation supporting the four scenarios listed above. 
Scenario 1: New devices are entered into the existing physical asset database, which sends a message to 
the ITAM system, which triggers other messages to be sent (IT support for configuration). When IT 
support configures the new laptop, that triggers numerous ITAM database updates related to hardware 
and software configuration. When the configured laptop is delivered to the new owner, a database 
update is performed recording the new ownership information. 
Scenario 2: Scenario 2 is very similar to the first scenario. A machine changes ownership and is 
reconfigured. In this scenario, a work order is entered to transfer a server from one department to 
another. This work order finds its way into the ITAM system, which triggers a series of events, messages, 
and reconfigurations that result in updates to the databases and changes to the software on the server. 
Scenario 3: The ITAM system receives a message for each virtual machine migration. These messages 
are checked against policy to determine if the move is valid or not. If the move is not valid, an alert is 
raised. These migration messages can also be used to improve performance by detecting machine or 
configuration issues that cause excess migrations. 
Scenario 4: The ITAM system adds context to security alerts from various sensors that are already on the 
network. For example, if an intrusion detection system triggers an alert such as “Illegal connection 
192.168.1.102 -> 8.8.8.8 TCP”, the ITAM system provides all of the system information pertaining to 
192.168.1.102 (the internal machine) such as machine name, operating system, configuration, location 
and owner. This saves the analyst valuable time and allows for more detailed event filters. 
32 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
5.3 Building an Instance of the Reference Architecture 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
We built one instance of the centralized ITAM capability. This build consists of a DMZ along with 
network security, IT systems, physical security, and physical asset management silos to implement the 
workflow and the ITAM system. Each silo has its own router, private subnet, and functionality. Each silo 
supports aspects of the Risk Management Framework and the NIST Framework for Improving Critical 
Infrastructure Cybersecurity. Each silo performs data collection, data storage, data analytics, and 
visualization specific to each silo’s purpose. Additionally, each silo integrates into the ITAM system to 
provide comprehensive reporting and visualizations for the end user. 
A detailed list of the components used in the ITAM build can be found in Table 4-2. 
5.3.1 ITAM Build 
The NCCoE constructed the ITAM build infrastructure using off-the-shelf hardware and software, along 
with open source tools. While the reference solution was demonstrated with a certain suite of products, 
the guide does not endorse these products in particular. Instead, it presents the characteristics and 
capabilities that an organization's security experts can use to identify similar standards-based products 
that can be integrated quickly and cost-effectively with existing tools and infrastructure. 
33 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
Figure 5-4 ITAM Build 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
The build architecture consists of multiple networks implemented to mirror the infrastructure of a 
typical financial services sector corporation. Figure 5-4 illustrates the ITAM build. The build is made up of 
five subnets that are all connected to a sixth DMZ network. The DMZ network (Figure 5-5) provides 
technologies that monitor and detect cybersecurity events, conduct patch management, and provide 
secure access to the mainframe computer. The Physical Asset Management Network (Figure 5-9) 
provides management of data such as system barcodes, room numbers, and ownership information. 
Network Security (Figure 5-6) provides vulnerability scanning along with a database for collection and 
analysis of data from hardware and software components. The IT Systems Network (Figure 5-7) includes 
systems that provide typical IT services such as email, public key infrastructure (PKI), and directory 
services. Physical Security (Figure 5-8) consists of management consoles for devices that operate and 
manage physical security. Such devices consist of badge readers and cameras. Firewalls between each 
subnet are configured to limit access to and from the networks, blocking all traffic except required inter
network communications. 
34 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
Figure 5-5 DMZ Network 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Demilitarized Zone – The DMZ in Figure 5-5 provides a protected neutral network space that the other 
networks of the production network can use to route traffic to and from the Internet or each other. 
There is an external and internal facing subnet. The DMZ also provides technologies that monitor and 
detect cybersecurity events, conduct patch management, and issue secure access to the mainframe 
computer. DMZ devices consist of Router0, Apt-Cacher, Bro, Fathom Sensor, Snort, and WSUS, as shown 
in Figure 5-6. Due to network configuration constraints, the network sensors were placed inside of the 
DMZ instead of in the Network Security subnet (Figure 5-6). 
Figure 5-6 Network Security Network 
Network Security – The network security architecture is represented in Figure 5-6. Network Security is 
where all devices pertaining to network security reside. These types of devices include IDS/IPS, 
SIEM/logging systems and vulnerability scanners. Devices within this network consist of Router2, 
OpenVAS, BelManage, and BelManage Data Analytics servers. 
35 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
Figure 5-7 IT Systems Network 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
IT Systems – The IT Systems network, shown in Figure 5-7, is dedicated to traditional IT systems. Devices 
included in this particular subnet are Router1, two Windows 7 clients, a wiki, certificate authority, email 
server, and two Windows 2012 Active Directory servers. One serves as primary while the other serves as 
a backup. Active Directory1 and Active Directory2 also provide domain name services (DNS). 
Figure 5-8 Physical Security Network 
Physical Security – The Physical Security Network (Figure 5-8) houses the devices that operate and 
manage physical security such as badge reader and cameras, along with their management consoles. 
Video Edge is a digital video recorder that records video from Camera1 and Camera2. Both cameras are 
36 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
in the server room recording anyone who physically accesses the ITAM hardware. iStar Edge is an 
embedded system that contains two radio frequency identification (RFID) badge readers. The iStar 
Controller communicates with both the Video Edge and iStar Edge systems. The iStar Controller 
determines if a valid badge was presented and if that badge should grant access into the server room. 
Figure 5-9 Physical Asset Management 
Physical Asset Management – The Physical Asset Management Network (Figure 5-9) contains devices 
that provide and collect information regarding physical assets. The devices include Router 3 and the 
data center asset management system, or AssetCentral. AssetCentral is a physical asset inventory and 
analysis system from AlphaPoint Technology. This tool allows users to view assets from multiple 
viewpoints including building, room, floor, rack, project, collection, or owner. CA ITAM is running IT 
Asset Management software from CA Technologies. The CA ITAM system records both new IT assets and 
ownership changes to IT assets. 
5.3.2 Access Authorization Information Flow and Control Points 
The ITAM solution deploys sensors throughout the enterprise that collect data from, or about, 
enterprise assets. The sensors can be installed on the assets, collecting data about installed software, or 
they can be remote devices that monitor and scan the network, reporting on vulnerabilities, anomalies, 
and intrusions. These sensors forward collected data to middle tier services that are responsible for 
storing, formatting, filtering, and forwarding the data to the analysis engine. Further analysis of the data 
is performed on the analysis engine and involves running select queries to retrieve defined data using a 
visualization tool also installed on the analysis engine. 
37 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
Figure 5-10 ITAM Data Flow 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
38 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
5.3.3 Tier 1 Systems 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Tier 1 systems collect, store, and analyze the data that they receive from the Tier 2 systems. They allow 
users to analyze the data and to visualize it for further analysis. 
5.3.3.1 Splunk Enterprise 
Splunk Enterprise serves as an operational intelligence platform that collects, stores, and analyzes the 
data from IT assets. The Splunk Enterprise services are responsible for the indexing, analysis, and 
visualization of the data. All filtered and formatted data makes its way, eventually, to the Splunk 
Enterprise system. Additional information can be found at http://www.splunk.com/. 
5.3.4 Tier 2 Systems 
Tier 2 is composed of systems that each perform a unique task. Each Tier 2 system is fully capable of 
collecting, storing, and analyzing data pertaining to its unique task. The middle tier systems filter 
relevant and desired data from the raw data collected and forward this data to the analysis engine and 
visualization tool for further analysis. 
5.3.4.1 Fathom 
Fathom Sensor passively monitors, captures, and optionally forwards summarized network traffic to its 
service running on the Amazon AWScloud. The Fathom service periodically compares the network traffic 
in the ITAM build to an aggregate of the network traffic from several other organizations to determine if 
abnormal activity has occurred. If abnormal activity is detected, Fathom Sensor will capture the type of 
activity and forward this information to Splunk Enterprise for further analysis. Additional information 
can be found at http://www.redjack.com/. 
5.3.4.2 Bro 
Bro monitors all network traffic in the enterprise and is configured to detect policy violations. It uses 
AlienVault, Mandiant and TOR threat intelligence data feeds to detect traffic to or from known bad sites. 
Alerts and messages from Bro are forwarded to the analysis engine and visualization tool. Network 
traffic information such as connections, DNS traffic, HTTP traffic, and SSL certificates are also forwarded 
to Splunk Enterprise. Bro messages are, by default, ASCII and tab delimited. Additional information can 
be found at https://www.bro.org/. 
5.3.4.3 Snort 
Snort is used to detect intrusions by capturing network traffic and comparing it to known signatures. If 
intrusions are detected, Snort creates alerts and forwards such alerts via CSV format to Splunk 
Enterprise. Information such as source and destination IP and port addresses, as well as type of 
39 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
signature match, are included in the updates. Additional information can be found at 
https://www.snort.org/. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
5.3.4.4 OpenVAS 
OpenVAS periodically scans enterprise hosts for known vulnerabilities, generates reports based on its 
findings, and forwards these reports in XML format to Splunk Enterprise. These reports indicate 
vulnerable systems, applications, and services. Additional information can be found at 
http://www.openvas.org/. 
5.3.4.5 WSUS 
Enterprise hosts with Microsoft Windows operating systems are configured to receive updates from 
WSUS. WSUS detects whether or not the hosts have the latest updates and sends updates to those hosts 
that are not in compliance. WSUS forwards reports in CSV format with details of compliance to Splunk 
Enterprise. Additional information can be found at https://technet.microsoft.com/en
us/windowsserver/bb332157.aspx. 
5.3.4.6 BelManage 
The BelManage server has agents installed on all clients. BelManage agents collect information about 
the installed software and forward it to the BelManage server, which stores it in its local database. The 
CSV-formatted reports are retrieved from the database and are sent periodically to Splunk Enterprise. 
Additional information can be found at http://www.belarc.com/belmanage.html. 
5.3.4.7 BelManage Data Analytics 
BelManage Data Analytics (BDA) provides an easy way for users to access, query, and create reports 
based on the data collected and analyzed by BelManage. The ITAM project gathers data from some of 
the queries for incorporation in overall dashboards. Additional information can be found at 
http://www.belarc.com/data_analytics.html. The information in BelManage is gathered directly by 
Splunk Enterprise using an SQL database query. 
5.3.4.8 Puppet Enterprise 
Puppet Enterprise enforces a configuration baseline on servers and workstations. Puppet agents run 
periodically, downloading a compiled configuration catalog from the Master and executing it on the 
hosts. A successful Puppet Enterprise agent run can make configuration changes, install new software or 
remove unwanted software, and sends success status updates to the Master. The ITAM solution 
configured the Puppet Enterprise Master to forward an absent or present status for enterprise hosts 
indicating whether or not they have had successful agent runs. These status messages are forwarded to 
Splunk Enterprise using the syslog facility. Additional information can be found at 
https://puppetlabs.com/puppet/puppet-enterprise. 
40 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
5.3.4.9 Openswan 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Openswan is an open-source virtual private network (VPN) for Linux operating systems. Openswan is 
used in the ITAM project for connecting the lab at the NCCoE to a facility in Nevada run by Vanguard 
Integrity Professionals, where the mainframe computer is located. Openswan is configured to provide a 
site-to-site VPN using IPsec. Additional information can be found at https://www.openswan.org/. 
5.3.4.10 Ubuntu Apt-Cacher0 
Ubuntu Apt-Cacher0 is an Ubuntu Linux server that provides package caching services for the ITAM lab. 
All of the Ubuntu devices on the network receive their software, patches, and updates from Ubuntu Apt
Cacher0. This centralizes update management, reduces the number of machines accessing the Internet, 
and reduces Internet bandwidth usage. Additional information can be found at 
https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Apt-Cacher-Server. 
5.3.4.11 AssetCentral 
AssetCentral is a Web-based IT asset management and data center management solution. Information 
on all physical IT assets used in the ITAM project was entered into AssetCentral. This information 
includes make, model, serial number, barcode, room, rack, and owner. This information is then used to 
provide a complete picture of the state of an asset. Splunk Enterprise utilizes a direct SQL database 
query to gather information from AssetCentral. 
5.3.4.12 CA Technologies IT Asset Manager 
CA Technologies IT Asset Manager provides asset management lifecycle support. This project uses CA 
ITAM for asset-based workflow management. For example, when a new asset arrives, it is entered into 
the CA ITAM product, which then tracks its provisioning and delivery. Splunk Enterprise utilizes a direct 
SQL database query to gather information from CA ITAM. Additional information can be found at 
http://www.ca.com/us/intellicenter/ca-it-asset-manager.aspx. 
5.3.4.13 iStar/C-Cure Controller 
The C-Cure controller from Software House provides badging and access controls for the physical 
security silo of this project. The C-Cure controller is part of the physical security system from Tyco 
Security Products that we used. The C-Cure Controller interacts with the iStar Edge and VideoEdge 
systems to provide an overall physical security solution. Access request information is exported from the 
iStar/C-Cure controller in .CSV format for use by Splunk Enterprise. Additional information can be found 
at http://www.swhouse.com/products/CCURE_ID_Badging.aspx. 
41 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
5.3.4.14 VideoEdge 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
VideoEdge is a network video recorder that records video from Camera1 and Camera2. VideoEdge is 
part of the physical security system from Tyco Security Products used in this project. Additional 
information can be found at http://www.americandynamics.net/products/videoedge_nvr.aspx. 
5.3.5 Tier 3 Systems 
Tier 3 systems are the assets (end points) on the enterprise network that are owned by the enterprise, 
such as workstations, switches, servers, users’ laptops, virtual machines, and other devices. All 
enterprise assets are monitored from the start of their lifecycle until disposal by the systems in the Tier 
2. Device location, owner, installed software catalog, current security vulnerabilities, and abnormal 
traffic activity are captured to allow for better visibility by administrators. 
5.3.5.1 AD1 
Active Directory (AD) is a special-purpose database that holds objects and attributes related to users, 
contacts, groups, computers, and organizational units. AD is used for authentication, authorization, and 
auditing of users and computers. Additionally, AD1 provides domain name services (DNS) to the entire 
lab network. The AD machines used for this project are run on top of the Microsoft Windows 2012R2 64
bit operating system. Additional information can be found at https://msdn.microsoft.com/en
us/library/Aa746492%28v=VS.85%29.aspx. 
5.3.5.2 AD2 
AD2 is a replica of AD1. The two systems provide redundancy and fault tolerance. 
5.3.5.3 Certificate Authority 
The Certificate Authority (CA) provides PKI capabilities to the lab. The CA creates and signs X.509 
cryptographic certificates for users and computers that are used throughout the lab. This project utilizes 
the CA that is part of the Microsoft Windows 2012R2 64-bit operating system. Additional information 
can be found at https://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/cc770357%28v=ws.10%29.aspx. 
5.3.5.4 Email Server 
The ITAM project utilizes the Postfix email server. The email server is used to collect messages, both 
status and informational, as well as for workflow management. Additional information can be found at 
http://www.postfix.org/. 
42 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
5.3.5.5 Ubuntu-Client1 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5.
Ubuntu-Client1 functions as a representative Linux client for the ITAM lab. Ubuntu-Client1 is configured 
as a full desktop load with a graphical operating system. The purpose of Ubuntu-Client1 is to show that 
the various ITAM functions, such as hardware and software monitoring, function correctly on a Linux 
system. Additional information can be found at http://www.ubuntu.com/. 
5.3.5.6 Win7-Client1 
Win7-Client1 functions as a representative Microsoft Windows client for the ITAM lab. Win7-Client1 
includes the full Microsoft Windows 7 desktop installation along with additional software such as 
Firefox, Google Chrome, and WinSCP. Win7-Client1 is a member of the lab5.nccoe.gov domain. The 
purpose of Win7-Client1 is to show that the various ITAM functions, such as hardware and software 
monitoring, function correctly on a Windows system. 
5.3.5.7 Win7-Client2 
Win7-Client2 performs the same functions as Win7-Client1. The purpose of Win7-Client2 is to provide 
additional data points for the ITAM system. 
5.3.5.8 Mainframe 
The mainframe computer provided by Vanguard Integrity Professionals and running their security, 
compliance, and configuration management software provides the ITAM system with information 
regarding the state of the mainframe. State information includes configuration, usage, and compliance 
information. The mainframe computer is physically located at Vanguard and accessed via VPN. You can 
find additional information at https://www.go2vanguard.com/. 
5.3.5.9 iStar Edge 
The iStar Edge is a door controller that is accessed over Internet Protocol (IP)-based networks. iStar 
controls access to two doors by using its RFID badge readers. The iStar Edge is controlled via the iStar 
Controller. The iStar system provides the ITAM system with information on human assets that are 
entering sensitive server rooms. The iStar Edge controller is part of the physical security system from 
Tyco Security Products used in this project. The iStar Edge is part of the physical security silo of the ITAM 
system. Additional information can be found at 
http://www.swhouse.com/products/hardware_iSTAR_Edge.aspx. 
43 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
5.3.5.10 Camera1 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5.
Camera1 is an Illustra 600 compact mini-dome IP camera that is part of the physical security silo of the 
ITAM system. Camera1 is part of the physical security system from Tyco Security Products. Camera1 
sends its images to the VideoEdge network video recorder. Additional information can be found at 
http://www.americandynamics.net/products/illustra-minidomes.aspx. 
5.3.5.11 Camera2 
Camera2 is same as Camera1 but is pointed in a different direction to capture different images. 
5.3.5.12 Routers/Firewalls 
The ITAM lab uses six routers/firewalls to route, segment, and filter traffic inside of the ITAM network. 
All of the routers/firewalls are virtual machines running the community version of pfSense. Each 
network segment has its own router/firewall and each router/firewall has its own unique configuration. 
Alerts and messages are forwarded to the analysis and visualization system. Additional information can 
be found at https://www.pfsense.org. 
44 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
Appendix A List of Acronyms 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
AD 
CA 
CA 
COTS 
CRADA 
CSF 
.csv 
DMZ 
FS 
HR 
ID 
ITAM 
IDS 
IP 
NAS 
NCCoE 
NIST 
OS 
PKI 
SME 
SQL 
SSL 
STIG 
TLS 
VLAN 
VPN 
Active Directory 
CA Technologies 
Certificate Authority 
Commercial Off-The-Shelf 
Collaborative Research and Development Agreement 
NIST Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity 
Comma-Separated Value 
Demilitarized Zone 
Financial Sector 
Human Resources 
Identity 
Information Technology Asset Management 
Intrusion Detection System 
Internet Protocol 
Network Attached Storage 
National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Operating System 
Public Key Infrastructure 
Subject Matter Expert 
Structured Query Language 
Secure Socket Layer 
Security Technical Implementation Guideline 
Transport Layer Security 
Virtual Local Area Network 
Virtual Private Network 
45 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
Appendix B References 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
[1] 
[2] 
CIS Critical Security Controls, SANS Institute [Website], https://www.sans.org/critical-security
controls/ [accessed 08/07/18]. 
Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity, Version 1.1, National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland, April 16, 2018. 
http://www.nist.gov/cyberframework/ [accessed 08/07/18]. 
[3] 
[4] 
[5] 
[6] 
[7] 
[8] 
[9] 
Joint Task Force Transformation Initiative, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information 
Systems and Organizations, NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-53 Revision 4, National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland, April 2013. 
http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-53r4.pdf [accessed 08/07/18]. 
Security Technical Implementation Guides (STIGs), Defense Information Systems Agency 
[Website], http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/Pages/index.aspx [accessed 08/07/18]. 
International Organization for Standardization/International Electrotechnical Commission, 
Information Technology – Security techniques – Code of practice for information security 
controls, ISO/IEC 27002, 2013. http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?csnumber=54533 
[accessed 08/07/18]. 
Joint Task Force Transformation Initiative, Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments, NIST Special 
Publication (SP) 800-30 Revision 1, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
Gaithersburg, Maryland, September 2012. 
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-30r1.pdf [accessed 
08/07/18]. 
Risk Management Framework: Quick Start Guides, National Institute of Standards and 
Technology [Website], http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SMA/fisma/Risk-Management-Framework/ 
[accessed 08/07/18]. 
Joint Task Force Transformation Initiative, Managing Information Security Risk: Organization, 
Mission, and Information System View, NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-39, National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland, March 2011. 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-39/SP800-39-final.pdf [accessed 08/07/18]. 
IT Asset Management: Securing Assets for the Financial Services Sector, Version 2, National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland, May 1, 2014, 
https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/sites/default/files/library/project-descriptions/fs-itam-project
description-final.pdf [accessed 08/07/18]. 
46 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
[10] 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
[11] 
[12] 
[13] 
International Organization for Standardization/International Electrotechnical Commission, 
Information technology — Security techniques — Information security management systems — 
Requirements, IEC/ISO 27001, 2013. http://www.iso.org/iso/iso27001. [accessed 08/07/18]. 
J. Wunder, A. Halbardier, and D. Waltermire, Specification for Asset Identification, NISTIR 7693 
Version 1.1, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland, June 2011. 
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/IR/nistir7693.pdf [accessed 08/07/18]. 
Risk Management Framework (RMF) Overview, National Institute of Standards and Technology 
[Website], http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SMA/fisma/framework.html [accessed 08/07/18]. 
http://wc1.smartdraw.com/cmsstorage/exampleimages/44b341d1-a502-465f-854a
4e68b8e4bf75.png [accessed 08/07/18]. 
47 
NIST SP 1800-5B: IT Asset Management 
NIST SPECIAL PUBLICATION 1800-5C 
IT Asset Management 
Volume C: 
How-To Guides 
Michael Stone 
Leah Kauffman, Editor-in-Chief 
National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence 
Information Technology Laboratory 
Chinedum Irrechukwu 
Harry Perper 
Devin Wynne 
The MITRE Corporation 
McLean, VA 
September 2018 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5 
The first draft of this publication is available free of charge from: 
https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/sites/default/files/library/sp1800/fs-itam-nist-sp1800-5-draft.pdf  
DISCLAIMER 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Certain commercial entities, equipment, products, or materials may be identified in this document in 
order to describe an experimental procedure or concept adequately. Such identification is not intended 
to imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST or NCCoE, nor is it intended to imply that the 
entities, equipment, products, or materials are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 1800-5C, Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. 
Spec. Publ. 1800-5C, 166 pages, (September 2018), CODEN: NSPUE2 
FEEDBACK 
As a private-public partnership, we are always seeking feedback on our Practice Guides. We are 
particularly interested in seeing how businesses apply NCCoE reference designs in the real world. If you 
have implemented the reference design, or have questions about applying it in your environment, 
please email us at financial_nccoe@nist.gov. 
All comments are subject to release under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). 
National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
100 Bureau Drive 
Mailstop 2002 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Email: nccoe@nist.gov  
i 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY CENTER OF EXCELLENCE 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
The National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE), a part of the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST), is a collaborative hub where industry organizations, government agencies, and 
academic institutions work together to address businesses' most pressing cybersecurity issues. This 
public-private partnership enables the creation of practical cybersecurity solutions for specific 
industries, as well as for broad, cross-sector technology challenges. Through consortia under 
Cooperative Research and Development Agreements (CRADAs), including technology partners—from 
Fortune 50 market leaders to smaller companies specializing in IT security—the NCCoE applies standards 
and best practices to develop modular, easily adaptable example cybersecurity solutions using 
commercially available technology. The NCCoE documents these example solutions in the NIST Special 
Publication 1800 series, which maps capabilities to the NIST Cyber Security Framework and details the 
steps needed for another entity to recreate the example solution. The NCCoE was established in 2012 by 
NIST in partnership with the State of Maryland and Montgomery County, Md. 
To learn more about the NCCoE, visit https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/. To learn more about NIST, visit 
https://www.nist.gov. 
NIST CYBERSECURITY PRACTICE GUIDES 
NIST Cybersecurity Practice Guides (Special Publication Series 1800) target specific cybersecurity 
challenges in the public and private sectors. They are practical, user-friendly guides that facilitate the 
adoption of standards-based approaches to cybersecurity. They show members of the information 
security community how to implement example solutions that help them align more easily with relevant 
standards and best practices, and provide users with the materials lists, configuration files, and other 
information they need to implement a similar approach. 
The documents in this series describe example implementations of cybersecurity practices that 
businesses and other organizations may voluntarily adopt. These documents do not describe regulations 
or mandatory practices, nor do they carry statutory authority. 
ABSTRACT 
While a physical asset management system can tell you the location of a computer, it cannot answer 
questions like, “What operating systems are our laptops running?” and “Which devices are vulnerable to 
the latest threat?” An effective IT asset management (ITAM) solution can tie together physical and virtual 
assets and provide management with a complete picture of what, where, and how assets are being used. 
ITAM enhances visibility for security analysts, which leads to better asset utilization and security. 
KEYWORDS 
asset management; financial sector; information technology asset management; ITAM; personnel 
security; physical security; operational security 
ii 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management iii 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We are grateful to the following individuals for their generous contributions of expertise and time. 
Name Organization 
FS-ISAC Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis Center 
Gorrell Cheek Western Union 
Joe Buselmeier American Express 
Sean Franklin American Express 
Ron Ritchey Bank of America 
Sounil Yu Bank of America 
Joel Van Dyk Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation 
Dan Schutzer Financial Services Roundtable 
George Mattingly Navy Federal Credit Union 
Jimmie Owens Navy Federal Credit Union 
Mike Curry State Street 
Timothy Shea RSA 
Mark McGovern MobileSystem7 
Atul Shah Microsoft 
Leah Kauffman NIST 
Benham (Ben) Shariati University of Maryland Baltimore County 
Valerie Herrington Herrington Technologies 
Susan Symington MITRE Corporation 
Sallie Edwards MITRE Corporation 
 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management iv 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Name Organization 
Sarah Weeks MITRE Corporation 
Lina Scorza MITRE Corporation 
Karen Scarfone Scarfone Cybersecurity 
 
The Technology Partners/Collaborators who participated in this build submitted their capabilities in 
response to a notice in the Federal Register. Respondents with relevant capabilities or product 
components were invited to sign a Cooperative Research and Development Agreement (CRADA) with 
NIST, allowing them to participate in a consortium to build this example solution. We worked with: 
Technology Partner/Collaborator Build Involvement 
AlphaPoint Technology AssetCentral 
Belarc BelManage, BelManage Analytics 
Computer Associates ITAM 
Microsoft WSUS, Server 2012R2 Certificate Authority 
Peniel Solutions Technology/Industry Expertise 
PI Achievers Penetration Testing Services 
PuppetLabs Puppet 
RedJack Fathom 
Splunk Splunk Enterprise 
Tyco iStar Edge 
Vanguard Integrity Professionals Security Manager 
 
 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management v 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Contents 
1 Introduction ........................................................................................ 1 
1.1 Practice Guide Structure ............................................................................................... 1 
1.2 Build Overview .............................................................................................................. 2 
1.2.1 Build Architecture Components Overview ................................................................... 5 
1.2.2 Build Network Components .......................................................................................... 6 
1.2.3 Operating Systems ........................................................................................................ 7 
1.3 Typographic Conventions .............................................................................................. 8 
2 Tier 1 .................................................................................................. 8 
2.1 Software Configurations ................................................................................................ 8 
2.1.1 Splunk Enterprise .......................................................................................................... 8 
2.1.2 How It’s Used ................................................................................................................ 8 
2.1.3 Installing Splunk Enterprise .......................................................................................... 9 
2.1.4 Configurations ............................................................................................................. 11 
2.1.5 Lookup Table Files ....................................................................................................... 27 
3 Tier 2 ................................................................................................ 28 
3.1 AssetCentral ................................................................................................................ 28 
3.1.1 How It’s Used .............................................................................................................. 28 
3.1.2 Virtual Machine Configuration .................................................................................... 29 
3.1.3 Network Configuration ............................................................................................... 29 
3.1.4 Installing AssetCentral ................................................................................................ 29 
3.1.5 Installing MySQL (MariaDB) ........................................................................................ 29 
3.1.6 Installing Apache ......................................................................................................... 30 
3.1.7 Installing PHP5 ............................................................................................................ 30 
3.1.8 Post Installation Tasks ................................................................................................. 30 
3.1.9 Database Update – Add a View .................................................................................. 31 
3.1.10 Add Assets into AssetCentral ...................................................................................... 32 
3.2 BelManage ................................................................................................................... 32 
3.2.1 How It’s Used .............................................................................................................. 32 
 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management vi 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
3.2.2 Virtual Machine Configuration .................................................................................... 33 
3.2.3 Network Configuration ............................................................................................... 33 
3.2.4 Installing BelManage ................................................................................................... 33 
3.2.5 Integration and Final Steps ......................................................................................... 35 
3.3 Bro ............................................................................................................................... 36 
3.3.1 How It’s Used .............................................................................................................. 36 
3.3.2 Virtual Machine Configuration.................................................................................... 36 
3.3.3 Network Configuration ............................................................................................... 37 
3.3.4 Installing Bro ............................................................................................................... 37 
3.3.5 Installing Intelligence Gathering Software .................................................................. 39 
3.3.6 Configuring Bro ........................................................................................................... 39 
3.3.7 Installing Splunk Universal Forwarder ........................................................................ 40 
3.3.8 Configuring Splunk Universal Forwarder .................................................................... 41 
3.3.9 Configurations and Scripts .......................................................................................... 42 
3.4 CA Technologies IT Asset Manager ............................................................................. 50 
3.4.1 How It’s Used .............................................................................................................. 50 
3.4.2 Virtual Machine Configuration.................................................................................... 51 
3.4.3 Network Configuration ............................................................................................... 51 
3.4.4 Installing CA ITAM ....................................................................................................... 51 
3.4.5 Configurations ............................................................................................................. 52 
3.5 Fathom Sensor from RedJack ...................................................................................... 54 
3.5.1 How It’s Used .............................................................................................................. 55 
3.5.2 Virtual Machine Configuration.................................................................................... 55 
3.5.3 Network Configuration ............................................................................................... 55 
3.5.4 Installing Fathom Sensor ............................................................................................. 55 
3.5.5 Installing Splunk Universal Forwarder ........................................................................ 61 
3.5.6 Configuring Splunk Universal Forwarder .................................................................... 62 
3.5.7 Helpful Commands and Information .......................................................................... 62 
3.5.8 Configurations and Scripts .......................................................................................... 63 
3.6 OpenVAS ...................................................................................................................... 64 
3.6.1 How It’s Used .............................................................................................................. 64 
 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management vii 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
3.6.2 Virtual Machine Configuration .................................................................................... 64 
3.6.3 Network Configuration ............................................................................................... 64 
3.6.4 Installation Prerequisites ............................................................................................ 65 
3.6.5 Installing OpenVAS ...................................................................................................... 65 
3.6.6 Configuring OpenVAS .................................................................................................. 67 
3.6.7 Installing Splunk Universal Forwarder ........................................................................ 69 
3.6.8 Configuring Splunk Universal Forwarder .................................................................... 69 
3.6.9 Configurations and Scripts .......................................................................................... 70 
3.7 Puppet Enterprise ........................................................................................................ 74 
3.7.1 How It’s Used .............................................................................................................. 74 
3.7.2 Prerequisites ............................................................................................................... 74 
3.7.3 Installing Puppet Enterprise Server ............................................................................ 75 
3.7.4 Puppet Enterprise Linux Agent Installation ................................................................ 75 
3.7.5 Puppet Enterprise Windows Agent Installation .......................................................... 76 
3.7.6 Puppet Enterprise Agent Configuration ...................................................................... 76 
3.7.7 Puppet Enterprise Manifest Files and Modules .......................................................... 77 
3.7.8 Reporting .................................................................................................................... 79 
3.7.9 Report Directory Cleanup ........................................................................................... 80 
3.7.10 Puppet Code and Scripts ............................................................................................. 80 
3.8 Snort ............................................................................................................................ 93 
3.8.1 How It’s Used .............................................................................................................. 93 
3.8.2 Virtual Machine Configuration.................................................................................... 93 
3.8.3 Network Configuration ............................................................................................... 93 
3.8.4 Installing Snort ............................................................................................................ 94 
3.8.5 Installing Snort ............................................................................................................ 94 
3.8.6 Get Updated Community Rules .................................................................................. 94 
3.8.7 Installing Barnyard2 .................................................................................................... 95 
3.8.8 Testing ......................................................................................................................... 96 
3.8.9 Installing Splunk Universal Forwarder ........................................................................ 97 
3.8.10 Configuring Splunk Universal Forwarder .................................................................... 97 
3.8.11 Configurations and Scripts .......................................................................................... 98 
 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management viii 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
3.9 Tyco Security Products .............................................................................................. 134 
3.9.1 Installing Tyco Security Products .............................................................................. 134 
3.9.2 Configurations ........................................................................................................... 134 
3.10 Windows Server Update Services (WSUS) ................................................................ 136 
3.10.1 How It’s Used ............................................................................................................ 136 
3.10.2 Virtual Machine Configuration.................................................................................. 136 
3.10.3 Network Configuration ............................................................................................. 136 
3.10.4 Installing WSUS ......................................................................................................... 137 
3.10.5 Configurations ........................................................................................................... 137 
3.10.6 Configure Active Directory Server to Require WSUS ................................................ 137 
3.10.7 Create WSUS Statistics for Splunk Enterprise ........................................................... 138 
3.10.8 Installing Splunk Universal Forwarder ...................................................................... 140 
3.10.9 Configuring Splunk Universal Forwarder .................................................................. 140 
3.10.10 Configurations and Scripts ........................................................................................ 141 
4 Tier 3 .............................................................................................. 142 
4.1 Active Directory Server .............................................................................................. 142 
4.1.1 Software Configurations ........................................................................................... 143 
4.1.2 How It’s Used ............................................................................................................ 143 
4.1.3 Installation ................................................................................................................ 143 
4.2 AssetCentral .............................................................................................................. 146 
4.2.1 How It’s Used ............................................................................................................ 146 
4.2.2 Virtual Machine Configuration.................................................................................. 146 
4.2.3 Network Configuration ............................................................................................. 146 
4.2.4 Installing AssetCentral .............................................................................................. 146 
4.2.5 Installing MySQL (MariaDB) ...................................................................................... 147 
4.2.6 Installing Apache ....................................................................................................... 147 
4.2.7 Installing PHP5 .......................................................................................................... 148 
4.2.8 Post Installation Tasks ............................................................................................... 148 
4.3 Email .......................................................................................................................... 148 
4.3.1 How It’s Used ............................................................................................................ 148 
 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management ix 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
4.3.2 Virtual Machine Configuration.................................................................................. 149 
4.3.3 Network Configuration ............................................................................................. 149 
4.3.4 Installing Email .......................................................................................................... 149 
4.3.5 Configure Email ......................................................................................................... 149 
4.3.6 User Accounts ........................................................................................................... 150 
4.3.7 DNS Settings .............................................................................................................. 150 
4.3.8 Configuration Files .................................................................................................... 151 
4.4 Openswan (VPN) ....................................................................................................... 152 
4.4.1 How It’s Used ............................................................................................................ 152 
4.4.2 Virtual Machine Configuration.................................................................................. 152 
4.4.3 Network Configuration ............................................................................................. 152 
4.4.4 Installing Openswan .................................................................................................. 153 
4.4.5 Installing Openswan .................................................................................................. 153 
4.4.6 Configurations and Scripts ........................................................................................ 154 
4.5 Ubuntu Apt-Cacher .................................................................................................... 157 
4.5.1 How It’s Used ............................................................................................................ 157 
4.5.2 Virtual Machine Configuration.................................................................................. 157 
4.5.3 Network Configuration ............................................................................................. 157 
4.5.4 Installing Ubuntu Apt-Cacher .................................................................................... 157 
4.5.5 Client Configuration .................................................................................................. 158 
4.6 Windows 2012 Certificate Authority ......................................................................... 158 
4.6.1 Software Configurations ........................................................................................... 158 
4.6.2 How It’s Used ............................................................................................................ 158 
4.6.3 Certificate Generation and Issuance ......................................................................... 162 
4.7 Common PKI Activities .............................................................................................. 163 
4.7.1 Generating a Certificate Signing Request from OpenSSL ......................................... 163 
4.7.2 Submitting the CSR to the CA Service ....................................................................... 163 
4.7.3 Exporting a Root Certificate from a Microsoft CA .................................................... 164 
4.7.4 Converting from DER Encoding to PEM Encoding .................................................... 164 
4.8 Process Improvement Achievers (PIA) Security Evaluation ...................................... 164 
 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management x 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Appendix A List of Acronyms ............................................................... 165 
 
List of Figures 
Figure 1-1 ITAM Build ........................................................................................................................... 5 
Figure 2-1 Splunk Enterprise Syslog TCP Input .................................................................................... 11 
Figure 2-2 Splunk Enterprise Syslog UDP Input ................................................................................... 11 
Figure 2-3 Splunk Enterprise Receive from Splunk Universal Forwarder ............................................. 12 
Figure 3-1 CCURE 9000 Overview ..................................................................................................... 135 
Figure 3-2 CCURE 9000 Messages ..................................................................................................... 135 
 
List of Tables 
Table 1-1 Build Architecture Component List ....................................................................................... 3 
Table 2-1 Splunk Enterprise Data Collection Methods .......................................................................... 9 
Table 2-2 Splunk Enterprise Indexes ................................................................................................... 12 
Table 2-3 Splunk Enterprise Apps ....................................................................................................... 13 
Table 2-4 Required Database Drivers ................................................................................................. 14 
Table 2-5 DB Connect v2 Identities ..................................................................................................... 15 
Table 3-1 Recommended Versions for AssetCentral – Tier 2 ............................................................... 29 
Table 4-1 Recommended Versions for AssetCentral – Tier 3 ............................................................. 147 
 
1 Introduction 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
The following volumes of this guide show information technology (IT) professionals and security 
engineers how we implemented this example solution. We cover all the products employed in this 
reference design. We do not recreate the product manufacturers’ documentation, which is presumed to 
be widely available. Rather, these volumes show how we incorporated the products together in our 
environment. 
Note: These are not comprehensive tutorials. There are many possible service and security configurations 
for these products that are out of scope for this reference design. 
1.1 Practice Guide Structure 
This National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Cybersecurity Practice Guide demonstrates a 
standards-based reference design and provides users with the information they need to replicate all, or 
parts of the build created in the NCCoE ITAM Lab. This reference design is modular and can be deployed 
in whole or in part. 
This guide contains three volumes: 
▪ NIST SP 1800-5A: Executive Summary 
▪ NIST SP 1800-5B: Approach, Architecture, and Security Characteristics – what we built and why 
▪ NIST SP 1800-5C: How-To Guides – instructions for building the example solution (you are here) 
Depending on your role in your organization, you might use this guide in different ways: 
Business decision makers, including chief security and technology officers, will be interested in the 
Executive Summary, NIST SP 1800-5A, which describes the following topics: 
▪ challenges enterprises face in implementing and using ITAM systems 
▪ example solution built at the NCCoE 
▪ benefits of adopting the example solution 
Technology or security program managers who are concerned with how to identify, understand, assess, 
and mitigate risk will be interested in NIST SP 1800-5B, which describes what we did and why. The 
following sections will be of particular interest: 
▪ Section 4.5, Risk Assessment and Mitigation, where we identify the steps we took to protect and 
monitor the ITAM system 
▪ Section 4.5.1, Assessing Risk Posture, where we identify the security measures used in this 
implementation 
1 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
▪ Section 4.5.2, Security Characteristics and Controls Mapping, where we map the security 
characteristics of this example solution to cybersecurity standards and best practices 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
▪ Section 4.6, Technologies, where we identify the products and technologies we used and map 
them to the relevant security controls 
You might share the Executive Summary, NIST SP 1800-5A, with your leadership team members to help 
them understand the importance of adopting standards-based IT Asset Management.  
IT professionals who want to implement an approach like this will find this whole practice guide useful. 
You can use this How-To portion of the guide, NIST SP 1800-5C, to replicate all or parts of the build 
created in our lab. This How-To portion of the guide provides specific product installation, configuration, 
and integration instructions for implementing the example solution. We do not recreate the product 
manufacturers’ documentation, which is generally widely available. Rather, we show how we 
incorporated the products together in our environment to create an example solution. 
This guide assumes that IT professionals have experience implementing security products within the 
enterprise. While we have used a suite of commercial products to address this challenge, this guide does 
not endorse these particular products. Your organization can adopt this solution or one that adheres to 
these guidelines in whole, or you can use this guide as a starting point for tailoring and implementing 
parts of IT Asset Management. Your organization’s security experts should identify the products that will 
best integrate with your existing tools and IT system infrastructure. We hope that you will seek products 
that are congruent with applicable standards and best practices. Section 4.6, Technologies, lists the 
products that we used and maps them to the cybersecurity controls provided by this reference solution. 
A NIST Cybersecurity Practice Guide does not describe “the” solution, but a possible solution. 
Comments, suggestions, and success stories will improve subsequent versions of this guide. Please 
contribute your thoughts to financial_nccoe@nist.gov. 
1.2 Build Overview 
The NCCoE constructed the Information Technology Access Management (ITAM) build infrastructure 
using commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) hardware and software along with open source tools. 
The lab network is connected to the public Internet through a virtual private network (VPN) appliance 
and firewall to enable secure Internet and remote access. The lab network is not connected to the NIST 
enterprise network. Table 1-1 lists the software and hardware components used in the build, as well the 
specific function each component contributes. 
2 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 3 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Table 1-1 Build Architecture Component List 
Host Product Function Internet Protocol 
Address 
Operating 
System 
Demilitarized Zone 
Bro Bro Network security monitor 172.16.0.20 Ubuntu 14.04 
FathomSensor RedJack Fathom Network analysis 172.16.0.50 CentOS 7 
OpenSwan OpenSwan Virtual Private Network 
(VPN) 
172.16.0.67 Ubuntu 14.04 
Router0 pfSense Router/firewall 172.16.0.11 
10.33.5.9 
BSD pfSense 
appliance 
Snort Cisco/Sourcefire 
Snort 
Intrusion Detection 
System 
172.16.0.40 Ubuntu 14.04 
Apt-cacher0 Ubuntu apt-cacher Patch management 172.16.0.77 Ubuntu 14.04 
WSUS Microsoft WSUS Patch management 172.16.0.45 Server 2012R2 
IT Systems 
AD1 Microsoft Active 
Directory 
Directory manager, AAA, 
DNS 
172.16.1.20 Server 2012R2 
AD2 Microsoft Active 
Directory 
Directory manager, AAA, 
DNS 
172.16.1.21 Server 2012R2 
CA server Microsoft Certifi
cate Authority 
PKI certificate authority 172.16.1.41 Server 2012R2 
Email Server Postfix Email server for the lab 172.16.1.50 Ubuntu 14.04 
PE Master Puppet Labs 
Puppet Enterprise 
Configuration manage
ment 
172.16.1.40 Ubuntu 14.04 
Router1 pfSense Router/firewall 172.16.0.12 
172.16.1.1 
BSD pfSense 
appliance 
Ubuntu Client1 Ubuntu Desktop Representative Linux 
client 
DHCP Ubuntu 14.04 
Win7-Client1 Microsoft 
Windows7 
Representative Windows 
client 
DHCP Windows 7 
Enterprise 
Win7-Client2 Microsoft 
Windows7 
Representative Windows 
client 
DHCP Windows 7 
Enterprise 
Network Security 
Router2 pfSense Router/firewall 172.16.0.13 
172.16.2.11 
BSD pfSense 
appliance 
BelManage Belarc BelManage Software, hardware, 
configuration information 
172.16.2.71 Windows Server 
2012R2 
 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 4 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Host Product Function Internet Protocol 
Address 
Operating 
System 
BDA Belarc BelManage 
Data Analytics 
Analytic information for 
BelManage 
172.16.2.72 Windows 7 
OpenVAS OpenVAS Vulnerability analysis 
system 
172.16.2.33 Ubuntu 14.04 
Physical Asset Management 
Router3 pfSense Router/firewall 172.16.0.14 
172.16.3.11 
BSD pfSense 
appliance 
AssetCentral AlphaPoint 
AssetCentral 
IT and datacenter asset 
management system 
172.16.3.103 CentOS7 
CA ITAM CA Technologies IT 
Asset Manager 
Lifecycle asset manage
ment 
172.16.3.92 Windows Server 
2012R2 
Physical Security 
Router4 pfSense Router/firewall 172.16.0.15 
192.168.1.11 
BSD pfSense 
appliance 
iStar Edge Tyco iStar Edge Security system with 
badge reader for door 
access 
192.168.1.169 Embedded 
NVR Tyco/American 
Dynamics 
VideoEdge 
Digital video recorder for 
IP security cameras 
192.168.1.178 Suse Linux 
(JeOS) 
Camera1 Illustra 600 IP 
camera 
IP security camera 192.168.1.176 Embedded 
Camera2 Illustra 600 IP 
camera 
IP security camera 192.168.1.177 Embedded 
CCure9000 CCure9000 Controller for iStar Edge 
and NVR 
192.168.1.167 Windows 7 
ITAM 
Router5 pfSense Router/firewall 172.16.0.16 
172.16.5.11 
BSD pfSense 
appliance 
Splunk Splunk Enterprise Data aggregation, 
storage, analysis and 
visualization 
172.16.5.55 RHEL 7 
1.2.1 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Build Architecture Components Overview 
The build architecture consists of multiple networks implemented to mirror the infrastructure of a 
typical financial industry corporation. The networks include a Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) network along 
with several subnets as shown in Figure 1-1. The DMZ network provides technologies that monitor and 
detect cybersecurity events, conduct patch management, and provide secure access to the mainframe 
computer. The Physical Asset Management Network provides management of identities and credentials 
for authorized devices and users. Network Security provides vulnerability scanning, along with a 
database for collection and analysis of data from hardware and software components. The IT Systems 
Network conducts configuration management and validation of client machines. Physical Security 
consists of management consoles for devices that operate and manage physical security. Such devices 
consist of badge readers and cameras. Firewalls are configured to limit access to and from the networks, 
blocking all traffic except required internetwork communications. 
Figure 1-1 ITAM Build 
5 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
1.2.2 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Build Network Components 
Internet – The public Internet is accessible by the lab environment to facilitate access for vendor 
software and NCCoE administrators. Internet access is not required to implement the build. 
VPN Firewall – The VPN firewall is the access control point for vendors to support the installation and 
configuration of their components of the architecture. The NCCoE also used this access to facilitate 
product training. This firewall also blocks unauthorized traffic from the public Internet to the production 
networks. Additional firewalls are used to secure the multiple domain networks (ITAM, DMZ, Network 
Security, IT Systems, Physical Security, Physical Asset Management). Each network uses pfSense routers 
for all of its routing and firewall needs. The router is also performing duties as an NTP server and DHCP 
server on all subnets except the DMZ, which does not allow DHCP. 
Demilitarized Zone – The DMZ provides a protected neutral network space that the other networks of 
the production network can use to route traffic to/from the Internet or each other. There is an external 
and internal facing subnet. The DMZ also provides technologies that monitor and detect cybersecurity 
events, conduct patch management, and issue secure access to the mainframe computer. DMZ devices 
consist of Router0, Ubuntu Apt-Cacher, Bro, Fathom Sensor, Snort and WSUS. 
ITAM – The ITAM network contains the Splunk Enterprise server that serves as the IT asset management 
database. The Splunk Enterprise server gathers logging and status information from all machines in the 
environment. The ITAM network also contains Router5. 
Network Security – The network security architecture is represented in Figure 1-1. Network security is 
where all devices pertaining to network security reside. These devices include Intrusion Detection 
System/Intrusion Prevention System (IDS/IPS), Security Event and Incident Management (SEIM), logging 
systems and vulnerability scanners. Devices within this network consist of Router2, OpenVAS, Belarc and 
Splunk Enterprise servers. 
IT Systems – The IT systems network is dedicated to traditional IT systems. Examples of such systems 
are Domain Name System (DNS), Active Directory, email, certificate authority, internal Web servers and 
client machines. Devices included in this subnet are Router1, two Windows 7 clients, a Wiki and two 
Windows 2012 Active Directory servers. One serves as primary while the other serves as a backup. 
Puppet Enterprise Master enforces security and configuration baselines across all endpoints. 
Physical Security – The physical security network houses the devices that operate and manage physical 
security, such as badge readers and cameras, along with their management consoles. The devices 
include Router4, iStar Edge, CCure controller, two badge readers and two Internet Protocol (IP) cameras. 
Physical Asset Management – The physical asset management network contains devices that provide 
and collect information regarding physical assets. The devices include Router3, AssetCentral and CA 
Technologies IT Asset Manager. AssetCentral is a physical asset inventory and analysis system from 
AlphaPoint Technology. It allows users to view assets from multiple viewpoints, including building, 
6 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
room, floor, rack, project, collection, or owner. AssetCentral is running on CentOS Linux. CA IT Asset 
Manager allows users to holistically manage IT hardware assets, from planning and requisition to 
retirement and disposal. 
1.2.3 
Operating Systems 
All machines used in the build had either Windows 7 enterprise, Windows server 2012 R2, Ubuntu 
14.04, RedHat Enterprise Linux 7.1 or CentOS 7 operating systems (OSs) installed. 
1.2.3.1 Base Windows Installation and Hardening Details 
The NCCoE base Windows OS images are Server 2012 R2 x86_64 and Windows 7 Enterprise x86_64 
Department of Defense (DoD) Security Technical Implementation Guide (STIG) images. The installation 
of both Windows systems was performed using installation media provided by the Defense Information 
Systems Agency (DISA). These images were chosen because they are standardized, hardened and fully 
documented. 
1.2.3.2 Base Linux Installation and Hardening Details 
The NCCoE base Linux OS is CentOS 7. This OS is available as an open source image. The OS was 
configured to meet the DoD CentOS 6, STIG. No CentOS 7 STIG was available at the time the build was 
implemented. 
7 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
1.3 Typographic Conventions 
The following table presents typographic conventions used in this volume. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Typeface/Symbol 
Meaning 
Example 
Italics 
file names and path names; 
references to documents that 
are not hyperlinks; new 
terms; and placeholders 
For detailed definitions of terms, see 
the NCCoE Glossary. 
Bold 
names of menus, options, 
command buttons, and fields 
Choose File > Edit. 
Monospace 
command-line input, 
on-screen computer output, 
sample code examples, and 
status codes 
mkdir 
Monospace Bold 
command-line user input 
contrasted with computer 
output 
service sshd start 
blue text 
link to other parts of the 
document, a web URL, or an 
email address 
All publications from NIST’s NCCoE 
are available at 
https://www.nccoe.nist.gov. 
2 Tier 1 
2.1 Software Configurations 
2.1.1 
Splunk Enterprise 
Splunk Enterprise is a software platform to search, analyze, and visualize the machine-generated data 
gathered from the websites, applications, sensors, and devices that comprise your IT infrastructure or 
business. Splunk Enterprise is comprised of a database, analytic engine, front-end and various ways of 
gathering data. 
2.1.2 
How It’s Used 
In the FS ITAM build Splunk Enterprise receives data from all of the sensors and IT asset management 
systems. Splunk Enterprise then indexes the data, analyzes it, and displays the results as both reports 
and graphical desktops. 
8 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Analysts can quickly view reports and dashboards to view commonly requested information. Analysts 
can also form ad-hoc queries on any of the data gathered and analyzed. Splunk Enterprise also provides 
the ability to alert on any security or performance event. 
On the high-level architecture diagram Splunk Enterprise is the Tier 1 ITAM server. Splunk Enterprise is 
running its own syslog server and collecting syslog information from all hosts on the network (port 514 
TCP/UDP). Splunk Enterprise utilizes several methods to acquire data from the ITAM systems which are 
shown in Table 2-1. The Splunk Enterprise server listens on TCP port 9997 for connections from 
Universal Forwarders. 
Table 2-1 Splunk Enterprise Data Collection Methods 
Product 
Method 
AssetCentral 
Bro 
Database Connection 
Splunk Universal Forwarder 
CA Technologies ITAM 
Snort 
Database Connection 
Splunk Universal Forwarder 
Fathom 
BelManage 
Splunk Universal Forwarder 
Database Connection 
Puppet 
Tyco 
Splunk Universal Forwarder 
Files & Directories 
WSUS 
OpenVAS 
Splunk Universal Forwarder 
Splunk Universal Forwarder 
Vanguard 
Splunk Universal Forwarder 
2.1.3 
Installing Splunk Enterprise 
1. Splunk Enterprise is installed on a hardened RedHat Enterprise Linux system. Please download 
the latest RPM file from Splunk and follow the instructions for installing from an RPM file. Instal
lation was performed following the instruction from Splunk at http://docs.splunk.com/Docu
mentation/Splunk/6.2.3/Installation/InstallonLinux#RedHat_RP% 20M_install. 
2. After installing the RPM file (explained in the Splunk Enterprise installation instructions), the fol
lowing steps are recommended to start Splunk Enterprise automatically at boot time: 
cd <splunk install_directory>/bin 
Commonly: cd /opt/splunk/bin 
./splunk start --accept-license 
9 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
./splunk enable boot-start 
./splunk enable boot-start -user splunkuser 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
./splunk start 
3. Splunk Enterprise also requires several ports to be opened through the firewall(s). To allow 
these ports through the built-in firewall on RHEL, enter the following commands: 
sudo firewall-cmd -permanent --add-port =8000/tcp 
sudo firewall-cmd -permanent --add-port =9997/tcp 
sudo firewall-cmd -permanent --add-port =514/tcp 
sudo firewall-cmd -permanent --add-port =514/udp 
sudo firewall-cmd -reload 
sudo firewall-cmd -list-ports 
4. It is also recommended to increase the number of files that can be open simultaneously. This is 
done by editing the /etc/security/limits.conf file. Please add the following lines to the end of 
/etc/security/limits.conf: 
soft nproc 8192 
hard nproc 8192 
soft nofile 8192 
soft nofile 8192 
Note: These will not take effect until you log off and on again. You can issue the ulimit—a 
command to verify that it worked. 
5. Splunk Enterprise can now be accessed by opening a web browser and going to 
http://localhost:8000 
Initial login = admin 
Initial password = changeme 
2.1.3.1 Disable Transparent Huge Pages 
Using Transparent Huge Pages causes performance degradation of up to 30% when using Splunk 
Enterprise. Splunk recommends disabling Huge Transparent Pages and details the issue at 
http://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/Splunk/6.2.3/ReleaseNotes/SplunkandTHP. 
1. To disable Transparent Huge Pages, we added the following lines to the end of /etc/rc.d/rc.local: 
#disable THP at boot time 
10 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
if test -f /sys/kernel/mm/transparent_hugepage/enabled; then echo never > 
/sys/kernel/mm/transparent_hugepage/enabled 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
fi 
if test -f /sys/kernel/mm/transparent_hugepapge/defrag; then echo never > 
sys/kernel/mm/transparent_hugepapge/defrag 
fi 
2. Ensure that rc.local is executable: 
chmod +x /etc/rc.d/rc.local 
3. Run the rc.local script to make the changes: 
/etc/rc.d/rc.local 
2.1.4 
Configurations 
2.1.4.1 Splunk Enterprise Data Inputs 
2.1.4.1.1 Syslog TCP 
1. Go to Settings > Data Inputs > TCP. 
Figure 2-1 Splunk Enterprise Syslog TCP Input 
2.1.4.1.2 Syslog UDP 
1. Go to Settings > Data Inputs > UDP. 
Figure 2-2 Splunk Enterprise Syslog UDP Input 
11 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
2.1.4.1.3 Receive Data from Splunk Universal Forwarders 
1. Go to Settings > Forwarding and Receiving > Configure Receiving. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
2. Click the New button, and enter port 9997. 
Figure 2-3 Splunk Enterprise Receive from Splunk Universal Forwarder 
2.1.4.2 Splunk Enterprise Indexes 
Splunk Enterprise stores events in indexes. By default, the main index holds all events. However, using 
multiple indexes has several benefits including controlling user access to events, different retention 
policies for different events, and faster searches in certain situations. A separate index was created for 
each input type and stored in the data directory (/data/splunk). Table 2-2 contains the list of indexes 
that were created. 
To create a new index, follow these steps. 
1. On the web page for Splunk Enterprise (https://172.16.5.55:8000). 
2. Navigate to Settings > Indexes. Then, click New. 
3. Enter a Name for the index (see Table 1-1 for the list of names). 
4. Ensure that the Home Path is set to /data/splunk. 
Follow the above steps for each index that you need to create. For additional information on indexes, go 
to: http://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/Splunk/6.2.3/Indexer/Setupmultipleindexes. 
Table 2-2 Splunk Enterprise Indexes 
Index Name 
alerts 
assetcentral 
belmanage_computers 
belmanage_hotfixesmissing 
belmanage_hw_changes 
12 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
Index Name 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
belmanage_sw_changes 
belmanage_software 
bro 
ca_itam 
fathom 
firewall 
mainframe 
openvas 
puppet 
router_configs 
snort 
syslog 
tyco 
wsus 
2.1.4.3 Splunk Enterprise Apps 
Several Splunk Enterprise Apps were used in this project. The list of Splunk Enterprise Apps needed for 
the ITAM project can be found in Table 2-3. Splunk Enterprise Apps assist in processing, analyzing and 
displaying different types of data. To download Splunk Enterprise Apps you must have a valid Splunk 
account. You can install Splunk Enterprise Apps from https://splunkbase.splunk.com/. 
To install Splunk Enterpise Apps, follow these steps: 
1. Download App from https://splunkbase.splunk.com/. 
2. On Splunk Enterprise web (https://172.16.5.55:8000). 
a. Apps (top left of web page) > Manage Apps 
b. Click Install app from file. 
Table 2-3 Splunk Enterprise Apps 
Splunk Add-On for Bro 
Splunk WebLog Add-On 
Extracts information from Bro logs. 
Extracts information from web logs, such as those from an 
Apache server. 
Splunk for Snort 
Extracts information from Snort logs. 
13 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
Splunk DB Connect v2 
Run queries on external databases and stores the info in Splunk 
Enterprise indexes. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Splunk App for CEF 
Technology Add-On for pfSense 
Extracts Common Event Format data 
Extracts information from pfSense router logs. 
IP Reputation 
Google Maps 
Provides IP reputation information for Splunk Enterprise queries. 
Provides geographic information and display for IP addresses. 
The Splunk DB Connect v2 app requires the downloading and installation of specific database drivers. 
Database-specific drivers should be placed in the directory 
$SPLUNK_HOME/etc/apps/splunk_app_db_connect/bin/lib. This project required the installation of 
database drivers for Microsoft SQL and MySQL. The drivers must be obtained from the database 
manufacturers; in this case Microsoft and MySQL/Oracle. For more detailed information, please refer to 
Install database drivers at 
http://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/DBX/latest/DeployDBX/Installdatabasedrivers. The required 
drivers are listed in Table 2-4. 
Table 2-4 Required Database Drivers 
Database 
Driver 
Microsoft SQL 
MySQL 
sqljdbc4.jar 
mysql-connector-java-5.1.36-bin.jar 
2.1.4.4 Splunk Enterprise Connections 
This section provides information about setting up connections that use the Splunk Enterprise DB 
Connect v2 app. The Splunk Enterprise DB Connect v2 app is used to connect to the following external 
databases: AssetCentral, BelManage and CA-ITAM. 
To get data from an external database Splunk Enterprise DB Connect v2 requires 3 main steps: 
1. Setup an identity. The identity is the username used to log into the database. 
2. Setup a connection. The connection is the network and database information. 
3. Setup an operation. The operation is what you want to do with the database (run an SQL query). 
Table 2-5 provides the information needed to perform these steps. 
14 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
Table 2-5 DB Connect v2 Identities 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Identity 
Used with 
asset_query 
mike 
AssetCentral 
BelManage 
splunk 
CA ITAM 
2.1.4.4.1 Splunk Enterprise DB Connect v2 Connections 
There should only be one database connection to each individual database. The database connections 
use the identities listed in Table 2-5. Please remember to select the Enable button when you configure 
each connection. 
DB Connect V2 AssetCentral Connection: 
▪ AssetCentral 
▪ Status: Enabled 
▪ Connection Name: assetcentral 
▪ App: Splunk DB Connect v2 
▪ Host: assetcentral 
▪ Database Types: MySQL 
▪ Default Database: assetcentral 
▪ Identity: asset_query 
▪ Port: 3306 
▪ Enable SSL: NOT CHECKED 
▪ Readonly: NOT CHECKED 
DB Connect V2 BelManage Connection: 
▪ BelManage 
▪ Status: Enabled 
▪ Connection Name: BelManage 
▪ App: Splunk DB Connect v2 
▪ Host: belmanage 
▪ Database Types: MS-SQL Server Using MS Generic Driver 
▪ Default Database: BelMonitor82_1 
15 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
▪ Identity: mike 
▪ Port: 1433 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
▪ Enable SSL: NOT CHECKED 
▪ Readonly: NOT CHECKED 
DB Connect V2 CA-ITAM Connection: 
▪ CA-ITAM 
▪ Status: Enabled 
▪ Connection Name: ca-itam 
▪ App: Splunk DB Connect v2 
▪ Host: ca-itam 
▪ Database Types: MS-SQL Server Using MS Generic Driver 
▪ Default Database: mdb 
▪ Identity: splunk 
▪ Port: 1433 
▪ Enable SSL: NOT CHECKED 
▪ Readonly: NOT CHECKED 
2.1.4.4.2 Splunk Enterprise DB Connect v2 Operations 
Operations are the SQL operations performed on the database connections and the results are saved 
into Splunk Enterprise indexes. The operations can be run automatically, on a recurring basis, or when 
new data is detected. 
Each operation has four components: 
▪ Name Input 
▪ Choose and Preview Table 
▪ Set Parameters 
▪ Metadata 
16 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
The following subsections show the configurations for each operation. 
AssetCentral: 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
DB Input: assetcentral 
1. Name Input 
a. Status: Enabled 
b. Name: assetcentral 
c. Description: Assets from AssetCentral 
d. App: Splunk DB Connect v2 
e. Connection: assetcentral 
f. 
Click the Continue button. 
2. Choose and Preview Table 
a. Make sure that Simple Query Mode is selected. 
b. Catalog: assetcentral 
c. Schema: NULL 
d. Table: assetview 
e. Max rows: 100 
f. 
Click the Magnifying Glass button and up to 100 rows should be returned and displayed. 
g. Click the Continue button. 
3. Set Parameters 
a. Type: Batch Input 
b. Max Rows to Retrieve: 100000 
c. Timestamp: Current Index Time 
d. Output Timestamp Format: YYYY-MM-dd HH:mm:ss 
e. Execution Frequency: 0 0 * * * 
f. 
Click the Continue button. 
17 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
4. Metadata 
a. Source: assetcentral 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
b. Sourcetype: assetcentral 
c. Index: assetcentral 
d. Select Resource Pool: local 
e. Click the Save button. 
BelManage_Computers: 
DB Input: BelManage_Computers 
1. Name Input 
a. Status: Enabled 
b. Name: BelManage_Computers 
c. Description: Computer info from BelManage 
d. App: Splunk DB Connect v2 
e. Connection: BelManage 
f. 
Click the Continue button. 
2. Choose and Preview Table 
a. Make sure that Simple Query Mode is selected. 
b. Catalog: BelMonitor82_1 
c. Schema: dbo 
d. Table: Computers 
e. Max rows: 100 
f. 
Click the Magnifying Glass button and up to 100 rows should be returned and displayed. 
g. Click the Continue button. 
3. Set Parameters 
a. Type: Rising Column 
b. Max Rows to Retrieve: 100000 
18 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
c. Specify Rising Column: ProfileDate 
d. Timestamp: Current Index Time 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
e. Output Timestamp Format: YYYY-MM-dd HH:mm:ss 
f. 
Execution Frequency: * * * * * 
g. Click the Continue button. 
4. Metadata 
a. Source: belmanage 
b. Souretype: belmanage_computers 
c. Index: belmanage_computers 
d. Select Resource Pool: local 
e. Click the Save button. 
Belmanage_hotfixesmissing: 
DB Input: belmanage_hotfixesmissing 
1. Name Input 
a. Status: Enabled 
b. Name: belmanage_hotfixesmissing 
c. Description: List of hotfixes/patches missing from each computer 
d. App: Splunk DB Connect v2 
e. Connection: BelManage 
f. 
Click the Continue button. 
2. Choose and Preview Table 
a. Make sure that Advanced Query Mode is selected. 
b. In the entry box type in the following SQL statement: 
SELECT HotfixesMissing.*, Computers.ProfileName, 
Comput-ers.NetworkIPAddress FROM HotfixesMissing INNER JOIN Computers on 
HotfixesMissing.Id = Computers.Id 
19 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
c. Click the Magnifying Glass button and up to 100 rows should be returned and displayed. 
d. Click the Continue button. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
3. Set Parameters 
a. Type: Batch Input 
b. Max Rows to Retrieve: 100000 
c. Timestamp: Current Index Time 
d. Output Timestamp Format: YYYY-MM-dd HH:mm:ss 
e. Execution Frequency: 30 4 * * * 
f. 
Click the Continue button. 
4. Metadata 
a. Source: belmanage 
b. Sourcetype: belmanage_hotfixesmissing 
c. Index: belmanage_hotfixesmissing 
d. Select Resource Pool: local 
e. Click the Save button. 
Belmanage_hw_changes: 
DB Input: belmanage_hw_changes 
1. Name Input 
a. Status: Enabled 
b. Name: belmanage_hw_changes 
c. Description: BelManage hardware changes 
d. App: Splunk DB Connect v2 
e. Connection: BelManage 
f. 
Click the Continue button. 
2. Choose and Preview Table 
a. Make sure that Simple Query Mode is selected.  
20 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
b. Catalog: BelMonitor82_1 
c. Schema: dbo 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
d. Table: HistoryReportAllHardware 
e. Max rows: 100 
f. 
Click the Magnifying Glass button and up to 100 rows should be returned and displayed. 
g. Click the Continue button. 
3. Set Parameters 
a. Type: Rising Column 
b. Max Rows to Retrieve: 10000 
c. Specify Rising Column: ActionDate 
d. Timestamp: Current Index Time 
e. Output Timestamp Format: YYYY-MM-dd HH:mm:ss 
f. 
Execution Frequency: */15 * * * * 
g. Click the Continue button. 
4. Metadata 
a. Source: belmanage 
b. Sourcetype: belmanage_hw_changes 
c. Index: belmanage_hw_changes 
d. Select Resource Pool: local 
e. Click the Save button. 
Belmanage_software: 
DB Input: belmanage_software 
1. Name Input 
a. Status: Enabled 
b. Name: belmanage_software 
c. Description: Software from BelManage 
21 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
d. App: Splunk DB Connect v2 
e. Connection: BelManage 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
f. 
Click the Continue button. 
2. Choose and Preview Table 
a. Make sure that Advanced Query Mode is selected. 
b. In the entry box type in the following SQL statement: 
SELECT 
ProfileName, 
Directory, 
C.ProfileDate AS ProfileDate_soft, CAST(C.ProfileDate AS DATE) AS 
ProfileDateDate_soft, 
DATEDIFF (dd, ProfileDate, GETDATE() ) AS ProfileDateDaysAgo_soft, 
DATEDIFF (mm, ProfileDate, GETDATE() ) AS ProfileDate-MonthsAgo_soft, 
CASE WHEN CAST ( (CAST(GETDATE() AS FLOAT) - CAST(ProfileDate AS FLOAT)) 
AS INT) < 31 THEN 'yes' ELSE 'no' END AS 
ProfileDateWithin-Last30Days_soft, 
CASE WHEN CAST ( (CAST(GETDATE() AS FLOAT) - CAST(ProfileDate AS FLOAT)) 
AS INT) < 61 THEN 'yes' ELSE 'no' END AS 
ProfileDateWithin-Last60Days_soft, 
CASE WHEN CAST ( (CAST(GETDATE() AS FLOAT) - CAST(ProfileDate AS FLOAT)) 
AS INT) < 91 THEN 'yes' ELSE 'no' END AS 
ProfileDateWithin-Last90Days_soft, 
CASE WHEN LastUsedTime > CAST('1971-01-01' AS smalldatetime) THEN 
LastUsedTime ELSE NULL END AS LastUsedTime_soft, 
CASE WHEN LastUsedTime > CAST('1971-01-01' AS smalldatetime) THEN 
CAST(LastUsedTime AS DATE) ELSE NULL END AS LastUsedDate_soft, -- SS2005 compatible:CASE WHEN LastUsedTime > CAST('1971-01-01' AS 
smalldatetime) THEN CAST(FLOOR(CAST(LastUsedTime AS FLOAT)) AS 
smalldatetime) ELSE NULL END AS LastUsedDate_soft, 
CASE WHEN LastUsedTime > CAST('1971-01-01' AS smalldatetime) THEN 
DATEDIFF(dd,LastUsedTime, C.ProfileDate) ELSE NULL END AS 
LastUsed-DaysAgo_soft, 
CASE WHEN LastUsedTime > CAST('1971-01-01' AS smalldatetime) THEN 
DATEDIFF(mm,LastUsedTime, C.ProfileDate) ELSE NULL END AS 
22 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
LastUsed-MonthsAgo_soft, 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
CASE WHEN LastUsedTime > CAST('1971-01-01' AS smalldatetime) THEN CASE 
WHEN CAST ( (CAST(C.ProfileDate AS FLOAT) - CAST(LastUsedTime AS FLOAT)) 
AS INT) < 31 THEN 'yes' ELSE 'no' END ELSE NULL END AS 
LastUsedTimeWithinLast30Days_soft, 
CASE WHEN LastUsedTime > CAST('1971-01-01' AS smalldatetime) THEN CASE 
WHEN CAST ( (CAST(C.ProfileDate AS FLOAT) - CAST(LastUsedTime AS FLOAT)) 
AS INT) < 61 THEN 'yes' ELSE 'no' END ELSE NULL END AS 
LastUsedTimeWithinLast60Days_soft, 
CASE WHEN LastUsedTime > CAST('1971-01-01' AS smalldatetime) THEN CASE 
WHEN CAST ( (CAST(C.ProfileDate AS FLOAT) - CAST(LastUsedTime AS FLOAT)) 
AS INT) < 91 THEN 'yes' ELSE 'no' END ELSE NULL END AS 
LastUsedTimeWithinLast90Days_soft, 
Company AS Company_soft, Product AS Product_soft, Version6Part AS 
Version6Part_soft, Version AS Version_soft, 
CAST(dbo.VersionMajor(Version6Part) AS varchar(6)) AS Ver-sionMajor_soft, 
CAST(dbo.VersionMajor(Version6Part) AS varchar(6)) + '.' + 
CAST(dbo.VersionMinor(Version6Part) AS varchar(6)) AS VersionMa
jorMinor_soft, 
CAST(dbo.VersionMajor(Version6Part) AS varchar(6)) + '.' + 
CAST(dbo.VersionMinor(Version6Part) AS varchar(6)) + '.' + 
CAST(dbo.VersionRev(Version6Part) AS varchar(6)) AS VersionMajorMi
norRev_soft, 
FileDescription, Filename, FileSize, 
dbo.VersionFormat(dbo.VersionCompose (ProductVersionNoMS, 
ProductVersionNoLS)) AS ProductVersionNo, 
dbo.VersionFormat(dbo.VersionCompose (FileVersionNoMS, FileVer-sionNoLS)) 
AS FileVersionNo, 
CASE StartUp WHEN 1 THEN 'auto' ELSE 'user' END AS StartUp, 
CASE InUse WHEN 1 THEN 'yes' WHEN 0 THEN 'no' ELSE NULL END AS InUse, 
CASE ServiceStatus WHEN 1 THEN 'running' WHEN 0 THEN 'stopped' ELSE NULL 
END AS ServiceStatus, 
CASE ServiceStartType WHEN 2 THEN 'auto' WHEN 3 THEN 'manual' WHEN 4 THEN 
'disabled' ELSE NULL END AS ServiceStartType, 
LastUserDomain, LastUser, LastUserFullName, 
CASE WHEN Is64Bit = 1 THEN 'yes' ELSE 'no' END AS Is64Bit, 
23 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
CASE WHEN IsNativeToOs = 1 THEN 'yes' ELSE 'no' END AS IsNativeToOs, 
MachineType, 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
ExeHeaderTypeLong AS ExeHeaderType, LoginUser, 
S.Language AS Language_soft, S.LanguageName AS LanguageName_soft FROM 
Software S INNER JOIN Computers C ON S.Id = C.Id; 
c. Click the Magnifying Glass button and up to 100 rows should be returned and displayed. 
d. Click the Continue button. 
3. Set Parameters 
a. Type: Rising Column 
b. Max Rows to Retrieve: 10000 
c. Specify Rising Column: ProfileDate_soft 
d. Timestamp: Current Index Time 
e. Output Timestamp Format: YYYY-MM-dd HH:mm:ss 
f. 
Execution Frequency: * * * * 
g. Click the Continue button. 
4. Metadata 
a. Source: belmanage 
b. Sourcetype: belmanage_software 
c. Index: belmanage_software 
d. Select Resource Pool: local 
e. Click the Save button. 
Belmanage_sw_changes: 
DB Input: belmanage_sw_changes 
1. Name Input 
a. Status: Enabled 
b. Name: belmanage_sw_changes 
c. Description: Software changes from BelManage 
24 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
d. App: Splunk DB Connect v2 
e. Connection: BelManage 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
f. 
Click the Continue button. 
2. Choose and Preview Table 
a. Make sure that Simple Query Mode is selected. 
b. Catalog: BelMonitor82_1 
c. Schema: dbo 
d. Table: SoftwareHistoryReport 
e. Max rows: 100 
f. 
Click the Magnifying Glass button and up to 100 rows should be returned and displayed. 
g. Click the Continue button. 
3. Set Parameters 
a. Type: Rising Column 
b. Max Rows to Retrieve: 100000 
c. Specify Rising Column: ActionDate 
d. Timestamp: Current Index Time 
e. Output Timestamp Format: YYYY-MM-dd HH:mm:ss 
f. 
Execution Frequency: */30 * * * * 
g. Click the Continue button. 
4. Metadata 
a. Source: belmanage 
b. Sourcetype: belmanage_sw_changes 
c. Index: belmanage_sw_changes 
d. Select Resource Pool: local 
e. Click the Save button. 
25 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
CA ITAM: 
DB Input: ca-itam 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
1. Name Input 
a. Status: Enabled 
b. Name: ca-itam 
c. Description: Asset from CA ITAM software 
d. App: Splunk DB Connect v2 
e. Connection: ca-itam 
f. 
Click the Continue button. 
2. Choose and Preview Table 
a. Make sure that Advanced Query Mode is selected. 
b. In the entry box type in the following SQL statement: 
SELECT DISTINCT 
aud_ca_owned_resource.resource_name,audit_model_uuid,audit_resource_cl 
ass, audit_resource_subclass, 
ca_owned_resource.own_resource_id,ca_owned_resource.mac_address,ca_own 
ed_resource.ip_address,ca_owned_resource.host_name,ca_owned_resource.s 
erial_number,ca_owned_resource.asset_source_uuid,ca_owned_resource.cre 
ation_user,ca_owned_resource.creation_date, 
al_aud_contact_view.first_name, al_aud_contact_view.middle_name, 
al_aud_contact_view.last_name, al_aud_contact_view.pri_phone_number, 
ca_owned_resource.last_update_date 
FROM aud_ca_owned_resource INNER JOIN ca_owned_resource 
ON aud_ca_owned_resource.resource_name=ca_owned_resource.resource_name 
INNER JOIN al_aud_contact_view 
ON   
ca_owned_resource.resource_contact_uuid   =  
al_aud_contact_view.contact_uuid 
c. Click the Magnifying Glass button and up to 100 rows should be returned and displayed. 
d. Click the Continue button. 
3. Set Parameters 
a. Type: Rising Column 
26 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
b. Max Rows to Retrieve: 1000 
c. Specify Rising Column: last_update_date 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
d. Timestamp: Current Index Time 
e. Output Timestamp Format: YYYY-MM-dd HH:mm:ss 
f. 
Execution Frequency: */5 * * * * 
g. Click the Continue button. 
4. Metadata 
a. Source: ca-itam 
b. Sourcetype: ca-itam 
c. Index: ca_itam 
Note: the index name is ca_itam with an underscore. Splunk Enterprise does not accept 
dashes in index names. 
d. Select Resource Pool: local 
e. Click the Save button. 
2.1.5 
Lookup Table Files 
Several lookup table files are necessary for this project. The lookup table files are in comma separated 
value format and contain data generated by reports that are used in other reports and dash-boards. 
To create a lookup table file: 
1. Open the Splunk Enterprise web page (https://172.16.5.55:8000) and go to the Lookup table 
files page. 
2. Select Settings > Lookups. 
3. Click Lookup table files. 
4. Click the New button. 
Create the following lookup table files: 
▪ /opt/splunk/etc/apps/search/lookups/AssetRisk_Alltime.csv 
▪ /opt/splunk/etc/apps/search/lookups/AssetRisk_Last7days.csv 
▪ /opt/splunk/etc/apps/search/lookups/AssetRisk_Last24hours.csv 
27 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
▪ /opt/splunk/etc/apps/search/lookups/asset_value_table.csv 
▪ /opt/splunk/etc/apps/search/lookups/license_table.csv 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
▪ /opt/splunk/etc/apps/search/lookups/updown 
▪ /opt/splunk/etc/apps/search/lookups/vun_rating_table.csv 
2.1.5.1 Splunk Enterprise Configuration Files 
Splunk Enterprise configuration files can be found in the external file titled 
Splunk_Configuration_Files.tar.gz. 
Configuration files are stored on Splunk Enterprise in the $SPLUNK_HOME/etc/system/local directory. 
2.1.5.2 Splunk Enterprise Dashboards 
Splunk Enterprise stores dashboards in XML format. All of the dashboards can be found in the external 
file titled Splunk_Dashboards.tar.gz. 
Splunk Enterprise dashboard files are stored on Splunk Enterprise in the 
$SPLUNK_HOME/etc/apps/search/local/data/ui/views directory. 
2.1.5.3 Restarting Splunk Enterprise After Configuration File Changes 
When you make changes to Splunk Enterprise using configuration files, you might need to restart Splunk 
Enterprise for the changes to take effect. See the following link for details: 
http://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/Splunk/6.2.3/Admin/Configurationfilechangesthatreq 
uirerestart. 
3 Tier 2 
3.1 AssetCentral 
AssetCentral is an IT infrastructure management system that stores and displays information related to 
physical assets including location, make, model, and serial number. AssetCentral can help run an entire 
data center by monitoring weight, utilization, available space, heat and power distribution. AssetCentral 
is installed on a CentOS7 system. 
3.1.1 
How It’s Used 
In the FS ITAM build AssetCentral is used to provide physical asset location. AssetCentral provides the 
building, room and rack of an asset. 
28 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3.1.2 
Virtual Machine Configuration 
The virtual machine is configured with 1 network interface cards, 4 GB of RAM and 1 CPU cores. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
3.1.3 
Network Configuration 
The management network interface card is configured as such: 
▪ IPv4 Manual 
▪ IPv6 Ignore/Disabled 
▪ IP Address: 172.16.1.50 
▪ Netmask: 255.255.255.0 
▪ Gateway: 172.16.1.11 
▪ DNS Servers: 172.16.1.20, 172.16.1.21 
▪ Search Domains: lab5.nccoe.gov 
3.1.4 
Installing AssetCentral 
AssetCentral is installed on a hardened CentOS7 Linux system. AssetCentral requires PHP, Web Server 
(Apache) and MySQL database to be installed. 
Table 3-1 Recommended Versions for AssetCentral – Tier 2 
Vendor 
Product 
Version 
RedHat 
Enterprise Linux Server 
Apache 
6.4 (Santiago) (x86_64) 
Web Server 
mysql 
httpd-2.2.15-26.el6.x86_64 
Server 
php  
5.1.66 
5.33 or higher 
3.1.5 
Installing MySQL (MariaDB) 
# yum -y install mariadb-server mariadb 
#systemctl start mariadb.service 
#systemctl enable mariadb.service 
# mysql_secure_installation 
1. Answer the questions with the default answers while performing the mysql_secure_installation. 
2. Create a database – assetcentral. 
29 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3. Create a user – assetcentral. 
4. Grant all privileges to assetcentral user. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
3.1.6 
Installing Apache 
# yum -y install httpd 
#systemctl start httpd.service 
#systemctl enable httpd.service 
#firewall-cmd --permanent --zone=public --add-service=http 
#firewall-cmd --permanent --zone=public --add-service=https 
#firewall-cmd -reload 
3.1.6.1 HTTP Configuration 
1. Go to HTTPD root; normally (/etc/httpd). 
2. Under the modules directory, make sure libphp5.so exists. 
3. Change document root (webroot) as per environment in httpd.conf. 
3.1.7 
Installing PHP5 
#yum -y install php 
#systemctl restart httpd.service 
#yum search php 
#yum -y install php-mysql 
#yum -y install php-gd php-ldap php-odbc php-pear php-xml php-xmlrpc php-mbstring php
snmp php-soap curl curl-devel 
1. Restart Apache: 
#systemctl restart httpd.service 
3.1.8 
Post Installation Tasks 
1. Copy AssetCentral files and folders from previous install to the new webroot. 
2. Under the location (../assetcentral/application/config), make necessary changes as per environ
ment. 
30 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3.1.8.1 Sample 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
<?php defined('ASSET_CENTRAL') or die(''); define('AC_URL_SUBDIR', '/acprod'); 
define('AC_URL_SCRIPT','/index.php'); define('AC_URL_PARAM','go'); 
define('AC_URL_PREFIX',AC_URL_SUBDIR . AC_URL_SCRIPT.'?' 
. AC_URL_PARAM . '='); define('AC_ERROR_REPORTING',E_ERROR); 
//no slash at the end of this url define('URL_SITE','http://10.1.xx.xxx'); 
define('OS','NIX'); // *NIX WIN BSD MAC 
//default database (read) define('DB_TYPE_READ','MYSQL'); 
define('DB_HOST_READ','127.0.0.1'); 
//usually leave this blank for MYSQL define('DB_PORT_READ',''); 
define('DB_USER_READ','assetcentral'); define('DB_PASS_READ','xxxxx'); 
define('DB_DATA_READ','asset_prod'); define('DB_PREFIX_READ',''); 
3.1.9 
Database Update – Add a View 
A database view was created on AssetCentral to gather all of the information required by the ITAM 
project in one place. This database view is accessed directly from Splunk Enterprise. 
1. On the AssetCentral machine, open a terminal window and type the following command to en
ter the MySQL client application (you will be asked for the root password of the MySQL data
base): 
mysql assetcentral -u root -p 
2. The following command will create the assetview view (from inside of the MySQL client applica
tion): 
create view assetview as 
select a.asset_id, a.rack_id, a.system_id, a.contact_id, a.serial_number, 
a.asset_tag, a.asset_name, a.ip_addr, a.description, a.title, 
a.internal_number, rack.rack_name, rack.room_id, rack.rack_type, 
rack.rack_notes, s.system_name, s.system_description, 
c.contact_name, c.phone_number, c.email_address, room.room_name, room.floor_id, 
floor.floor_name 
from assets a 
left join racks rack on a.rack_id = rack.rack_id left join systems s on 
a.system_id = s.system_id left join contacts c on a.contact_id = c.contact_id 
left join rooms room on rack.room_id = room.room_id 
left join floors floor on room.floor_id = floor.floor_id where a.asset_deleted 
!= 1; 
3. Create a new database user and assign that user privilges on the assetview view (from inside of 
the MySQL client application): 
31 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
create new users and privileges inside mysql/mariadb create user 
'asset_query'@'localhost'; 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
set password for 'asset_query'@'localhost' = password('password'); grant select 
on assetcentral.assetview to 'asset_query'@'localhost'; grant file on *.* to 
'asset_query'@'localhost'; 
4. Ensure that the MySQL network port is listening and is allowed through the firewall. You must 
be root to run these commands. 
5. To verify that MySQL is listening: 
netstat -l |grep mysql 
6. To allow MySQL through the firewalld firewall: 
firewall-cmd -permanent -add-service=mysql firewall-cmd -reload 
7. To make sure the firewall rule was added correctly: 
firewall-cmd -list-services 
3.1.10 Add Assets into AssetCentral 
For AssetCentral to be of use, the end user must populate the system with all of the IT hardware to be 
tracked. 
AssetCentral provides a manual method of adding one or two assets as well as an automated method of 
adding numerous assets that have been saved in a spreadsheet. 
3.2 BelManage 
BelManage is installed on a Windows Server 2012R2 system. BelManage gathers hardware and software 
information from computers on the network. BelManage gathers, stores, analyzes and displays the 
hardware and software information in a Web application. The BelMonitor client is installed on all 
computers in the network and automatically sends the BelManage server information on hardware and 
software changes. 
3.2.1 
How It’s Used 
The ITAM system is using BelManage for its data gathering, analysis and reporting features. BelManage 
reports on all software installed and all hardware configurations for every machine on the network that 
is running the BelMonitor client. 
Splunk Enterprise connects to the BelManage database to pull data and provide further analysis and 
correlation. 
32 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3.2.2 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Virtual Machine Configuration 
The BelManage virtual machine is configured with 1 network interface card, 8 gigabytes (GB) of random 
access memory (RAM) and one central processing unit (CPU) core. 
3.2.3 
Network Configuration 
The management network interface card is configured as follows: 
▪ IPv4 Manual 
▪ IPv6 Disabled 
▪ IP Address: 172.16.2.71 
▪ Netmask: 255.255.255.0 
▪ Gateway: 172.16.2.11 
▪ DNS Servers: 172.16.1.20, 172.16.1.21 
▪ Search Domains: lab5.nccoe.gov 
3.2.4 
Installing BelManage 
Before installing BelManage, verify that your Windows Server 2012R2 system is installed correctly, 
updated and that the network is correctly configured and working. Additionally, you may have to disable 
or modify some security services, such as AppLocker, during the installation process. 
BelManage is installed by running the BelManage server installation program 
(BelManageServer8.1.31.exe). Documentation is provided by Belarc at 
https://www.belarc.com/en/products_belmanage.  
3.2.4.1 Prerequisites 
Internet Information Server (IIS) 4.0 or later must be installed. The website below has detailed 
instructions on installing IIS: http://www.iis.net/learn/install/installing-iis-85/installing-iis-85-on
windows-server-2012-r2. 
BelManage requires the following options: Static Content, Default Document, ASP Application 
Development, IIS Management Scripts and Tools, IIS 6 Metabase Compatibility, IIS 6 WMI Compatibility, 
and IIS 6 Scripting Tools. 
MS SQL Express will be installed as part of the normal BelManage installation process. 
Microsoft (MS) Structured Query Language (SQL) Server Management Studio is not required but is 
highly recommended. MS SQL Server Management Studio will make it easy to work on the BelManage 
database. Make sure you run MS SQL Server Management Studio as administrator or you will get 
33 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
permission errors. Additional information can be found at: https://msdn.microsoft.com/en
us/library/ms174173.aspx. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
3.2.4.2 Installation Procedure 
3.2.4.2.1 Installing the BelManage Server 
1. Open Windows File Explorer and navigate to where your BelManage installer is located. 
2. Right-click on the BelManage installer file and select Run as Administrator. 
3. Choose the default selections. 
Note: You will need to enter your BelManage license number during the installation process. 
3.2.4.2.2 Installing the BelManage Client 
The BelMonitor client must be installed on all devices that you wish to monitor. 
The BelMonitor client should also be installed on the BelManage server if you wish to monitor. 
1. The BelMonitor client can be downloaded directly from the BelManage server that was just in
stalled: Point your web browser to your BelManage server (172.16.2.71): 
http://172.16.2.71/BelManage 
2. Enter your login and password. 
3. Select the Getting Started option on the left side of the page. 
4. Select Download your installable BelMonitor client from the middle of the page. 
5. Select the appropriate download – Windows, Linux, Mac OSX or Solaris. 
6. Follow the steps in the relevant section. 
a. For Windows machines: 
i. 
ii. 
Right-click the BelMonitor client and select Run as Administrator. 
Then accept the default settings. The BelMonitor client will be installed and set to 
autorun when the system boots. There should be an icon in your system tray 
(right-side) that looks like a little green eye with eyelashes. 
b. For Linux machines: 
The BelMonitor client must be installed as the root user. 
i. 
To install the BelMonitorLinux client on Linux machines you must first install the 
32-bit compatibility libraries. On Ubuntu the process is as follows: 
34 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
apt-get install lib32stdc++6 
ii. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
iii. 
iv. 
The BelMonitor client uses RPM (RedHat Package Manager) which can be installed 
as follows: 
apt-get install rpm 
Make the BelMonitorLinux executable. 
chmod a+x BelMonitorLinux 
Start the installation. 
./BelMonitorLinux 
The BelMonitor client should now be running and reporting to the BelManage server every 15 minutes 
(default setting). 
3.2.5 
Integration and Final Steps 
1. Use MS SQL Server Studio Manager to create a database user for the Splunk Enterprise database 
connection. A new user must be created and be added to the correct database for the Splunk 
Enterprise integration to work. 
2. Right-click MS SQL Server Studio Manager and select Run as Administrator. 
3. Click Connect as the default settings should be correct: 
Server type: Database Engine 
Server name: BELARC\BELMANAGE 
Authentication: Windows Authentication 
4. Once MS SQL Server Management Studio has logged in and started, create a new database user. 
a. Select Security > Logins. 
b. Right-click Logins and select New User. 
c. Enter a Login name. 
d. Select SQL Server authentication. 
e. Enter a password. 
f. 
Enter the password again in the Confirm password box. 
g. The Enforce password policy, Enforce password expiration and User must change pass
word at next login should all reflect your organization’s security rules. 
35 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
Default database = BelMonitor82_1 
Default language = English 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
5. Add the new user that you created in the preceding steps to the BelMonitor82_1 database. 
a. Select Databases > BelMonitor82_1 > Security > Users. 
b. Right-click Users and select New User. 
c. Enter a user name for the new user in the User Name and Login Name fields. They 
should be identical. 
Default schema = db_datareader 
Schemas owned by this user = none selected 
d. Database role membership: BelMonitorReader and db_datareader should be checked. 
6. Turn on or re-enable any security settings that you might have changed, such as AppLocker. 
3.3 Bro 
Bro is an open-source network security monitor. Bro efficiently analyzes all network traffic and provides 
insight into clear text password use, cryptographic certificate errors, traffic to known bad sites, network 
flow, and file transfers. 
3.3.1 
How It’s Used 
In the FS ITAM build, Bro monitors all traffic traversing the DMZ. Bro has a dedicated network interface 
in promiscuous mode for sniffing/capturing traffic. This interface does not have an IP address assigned. 
Bro has a second network interface for management that is assigned IP address 172.16.0.20. When 
configuring Bro, make sure that Bro is sniffing/capturing on the correct network interface. 
On the high-level architecture diagram, Bro is in Tier 2. Bro uses the Splunk Universal Forwarder to send 
logs to Splunk Enterprise. Some of the logs include files, Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) traffic, 
Kerberos authentications, Secure Socket Layer (SSL) traffic, x509 certificates seen, known hosts, DNS 
traffic, all connections, notices, and intelligence alerts. 
3.3.2 
Virtual Machine Configuration 
The Bro virtual machine is configured with two network interface cards, 16 GB of RAM and four CPU 
cores. 
36 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3.3.3 
Network Configuration 
The management network interface card is configured as follows: 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
▪ IPv4 Manual 
▪ IPv6 Ignore/Disabled 
▪ IP Address: 172.16.0.20 
▪ Netmask: 255.255.255.0 
▪ Gateway: 172.16.0.11 
▪ DNS Servers: 172.16.1.20, 172.16.1.21 
▪ Search Domains: lab5.nccoe.gov 
3.3.4 
Installing Bro 
Bro is installed on a hardened Ubuntu 14.04 Linux system. Please download the latest source package 
from Bro and follow the instructions for installing from source. Installation was performed following the 
instruction from Bro at: https://www.bro.org/sphinx/install/index.html. 
3.3.4.1 Installation Prerequisites 
Bro requires the following libraries and tools to be installed before you begin: 
▪ Libpcap (http://www.tcpdump.org) 
▪ OpenSSL libraries (http://www.openssl.org) 
▪ BIND8 library 
▪ Libz 
▪ Bash (for BroControl) 
▪ Python (for BroControl) 
To build Bro from source, the following additional dependencies are required: 
▪ CMake 2.8 or greater (http://www.cmake.org) 
▪ Make 
▪ C/C++ compiler 
▪ SWIG (http://www.swig.org) 
▪ Bison (GNU Parser Generator) 
▪ Flex (Fast Lexical Analyzer) 
37 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
▪ Libpcap headers (http://www.tcpdump.org) 
▪ OpenSSL headers (http://www.openssl.org) 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
▪ zlib headers 
▪ Perl 
3.3.4.1.1 For Debian/Ubuntu Linux systems: 
1. It is always best to make sure your system is up-to-date by performing: 
sudo apt-get update sudo apt-get upgrade 
2. Then install the prerequisites: 
sudo apt-get install cmake make gcc g++ flex bison libpcap-dev libssl-dev 
python-dev swig zlib1g-dev 
sudo apt-get install libgeoip-dev 
sudo apt-get install libgoogle-perftools-dev sudo apt-get install curl 
sudo apt-get install git 
3. Download and install Bro (this will install in /usr/local/bro): 
Note: You need to be root to install Bro. 
cd /usr/local 
git clone https://github.com/actor-framework/actor-framework.git cd 
/usr/local/actor-framework 
./configure make 
make test 
make install 
3.3.4.2 Installation Procedure 
cd /usr/local 
git clone --recursive git://git.bro.org/bro cd /usr/local/bro 
./configure make 
make install 
1. Add Bro bin directory to your runtime path: 
Edit .bashrc 
2. Add the following line to the end of .bashrc: 
EXPORT PATH=/usr/local/bro/bin:$PATH 
38 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3. Then: 
source .bashrc 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
4. To start Bro the first time: 
broctl deploy 
5. To check the status of Bro: 
broctl status 
3.3.5 
Installing Intelligence Gathering Software 
1. Uses the mal-dnssearch package from Jon Schipp, which must be installed. The compiled version 
will be installed into /usr/local/bin/mal-dnssearch. 
cd /opt 
git clone https://github.com/jonschipp/mal-dnssearch cd /opt/mal-dnssearch 
sudo make 
sudo make install 
mkdir  /usr/local/bro_intel 
cd /usr/local/bro_intel 
2. Copy the update_intel.sh script into /usr/local/bro_intel. 
cp update_intel.sh /usr/local/bro_intel 
chmod 700 /usr/local/bro_intel/update_intel.sh cd /usr/local/bro_intel 
./update_intel.sh 
You should now have several files usable with the Bro Intelligence Framework, including tor.intel, 
mandiant.intel, and alienvault.intel. 
3. To have the script run automatically every day, add a link inside /etc/cron.daily. 
ln -s /usr/local/bro_intel/update_intel.sh 
/etc/cron.daily/update_intel 
3.3.6 
Configuring Bro 
To implement all of the functionality in the FS-ITAM use case build, the default Bro configurations will 
need to be modified. Please follow these steps to gain the same functionality. 
1. Stop Bro: 
39 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
broctl stop 
2. Copy and edit node.cfg: 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
cp /usr/local/bro/etc/node.cfg /usr/local/bro/etc/node.cfg.orig cp 
<source_dir>/node.cfg /usr/local/bro/etc 
Edit node.cfg, making sure that interface=eth0 is the correct interface on which you will be 
sniffing/capturing traffic (NOT your management interface). 
3. Edit networks.cfg: 
The networks.cfg file identifies all of your internal networks, so please list them all here. Below 
is our example: 
List of local networks in CIDR notation, optionally followed by a descriptive tag. For example: 
10.0.0.0/8 or fe80::/64 are valid prefixes. 
10.0.0.0/8 Private IP space 
192.168.0.0/16 Private IP space 
172.16.0.0/16 Private IP space 
4. Edit the local.bro file to reflect the settings you want: 
cp /usr/local/bro/share/bro/site/local.bro 
/usr/local/bro/share/bro/site/local.bro.orig 
cp <source_dir>/local.bro /usr/local/bro/share/bro/site/ 
5. Check changes, install changes, and restart Bro: 
broctl check broctl install broctl start broctl status 
If everything goes right, you should start seeing log files in /usr/local/bro/logs/current. 
3.3.7 
Installing Splunk Universal Forwarder 
Note: You will need a Splunk account to download the Splunk Universal Forwarder. The Splunk Universal 
Forwarder is free and can be downloaded from: https://www.splunk.com/page/sign_up. 
1. Download the Splunk Universal Forwarder from: http://www.splunk.com/en_us/download/uni
versal-forwarder.html. 
2. You want the latest version for OS version 2.6+ kernel Linux distributions (64-bit). 
Since this is installing on Ubuntu, select the file that ends in .deb. An example is: 
splunkforwader-6.2.5-272645-linux-2.6-amd64.deb 
40 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Detailed installation instructions can be found at: 
http://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/Splunk/6.2.3/Installation/InstallonLinux. 
3. An abridged version follows: 
dpkg -i <splunk_package_name.deb> 
Example: dpkg -i splunkforwader-6.2.5-272645-linux-2.6-amd64.deb 
4. This will install in /opt/splunkforwarder: 
cd /opt/splunkforwarder/bin 
./splunk start --accept-license 
./splunk enable boot-start 
5. Add forwarder: 
More information about adding a forwarder can be found at: 
http://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/Splunk/6.2.3/Forwarding/Deployanixdfmanually. 
cd /opt/splunkforwarder/bin 
./splunk add forward-server loghost:9997 -auth admin:changme 
3.3.8 
Configuring Splunk Universal Forwarder 
Configuring Splunk Universal Forwarder as shown in the FS-ITAM use case requires X.509 Certificates for 
the Splunk Enterprise server/indexer and each Splunk Universal Forwarder. You will also need a copy of 
your certificate authority's public certificate. 
1. Create a directory to hold your certificates: 
mkdir /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/certs 
2. Copy your certificates in PEM format to /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/certs: 
cp CAServerCert.pem /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/certs 
cp bro_worker1.pem /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/certs 
3. Copy the Splunk Universal Forwarder configuration files: 
cp <server.conf> /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local 
cp <inputs.conf> /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local 
cp <outputs.conf> /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local 
4. Modify server.conf so that: 
ServerName=Bro is your hostname. 
41 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
sslKeysfilePassword = <password for your private key> 
5. Modify outputs.conf so that: 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Server = loghost:9997 is your correct Splunk Enterprise server/indexer and port. 
sslPassword = <password of your certificate private key> 
Note: This will be hashed and not clear text after a restart. 
Inputs.conf should work, but you are free to modify it to include the Bro logs that you are interested in. 
Note: dns.log, conn.log and http.log generate a significant volume of messages for Splunk Enterprise to 
index. Depending on the size of your Splunk Enterprise license, this data volume might cause license 
warnings or violations. See 
http://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/Splunk/6.2.3/Admin/Aboutlicenseviolations for more 
information. 
3.3.9 
Configurations and Scripts 
Update_intel.sh should be placed in /usr/local/bro_intel. 
#!/bin/sh 
# This script downloads and formats reputation data from the Internet and formats it 
so that Bro can use it as intel data. 
# Good idea to restart bro every now and then: broctl restart 
# /usr/local/bro/share/bro/site/local.bro 
# 
looks for the files in this directory. 
# Uses the mal-dnssearch package from Jon Schipp 
# git clone https://github.com/jonschipp/mal-dnssearch 
# cd mal-dnssearch 
# sudo make install 
# 
cd /usr/local/bro_intel 
# download and format the Mandiant APT info 
mal-dnssearch -M mandiant -p | mal-dns2bro -T dns -s mandiant -n true > 
/usr/local/bro_intel/mandiant.intel 
42 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# download and format TOR info 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
mal-dnssearch -M tor -p | mal-dns2bro -T ip -s tor -n true -u 
http://rules.emergingthreats.net/open/suricata/rules/tor.rules > 
/usr/local/bro_intel/tor.intel 
# download and format Alienvault reputation info 
mal-dnssearch -M alienvault -p | mal-dns2bro -T ip -s alienvault -n true > 
/usr/local/bro_intel/alienvault.intel 
/usr/local/bro/etc/node.cfg 
# Example BroControl node configuration. 
# 
# This example has a standalone node ready to go except for possibly changing 
# the sniffing interface. 
# This is a complete standalone configuration. Most likely you will 
# only need to change the interface. [bro] 
type=standalone host=localhost interface=eth1 
## Below is an example clustered configuration. If you use this, 
## remove the [bro] node above. 
#[manager] 
#type=manager 
#host=host1 
# 
#[proxy-1] 
#type=proxy 
#host=host1 
# 
#[worker-1] 
#type=worker 
43 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
#host=host2 
#interface=eth0 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# 
#[worker-2] 
#type=worker 
#host=host3 
#interface=eth0 
# 
#[worker-3] 
#type=worker 
#host=host4 
#interface=eth0 
/usr/local/bro/share/bro/site/local.bro 
##! Local site policy. Customize as appropriate. 
##! 
##! This file will not be overwritten when upgrading or reinstalling! 
# Capture plaintext passwords 
redef HTTP::default_capture_password=T; redef FTP::default_capture_password=T; 
#Hash all HTTP - for APT script 
#redef HTTP::generate_md5=/.*/; 
# This script logs which scripts were loaded during each run. 
@load misc/loaded-scripts 
# Apply the default tuning scripts for common tuning settings. 
@load tuning/defaults 
# Load the scan detection script. 
44 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
@load misc/scan 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# Log some information about web applications being used by users 
# on your network. 
@load misc/app-stats 
# Detect traceroute being run on the network. 
@load misc/detect-traceroute 
# Generate notices when vulnerable versions of software are discovered. 
# The default is to only monitor software found in the address space defined 
# as "local". Refer to the software framework's documentation for more 
# information. 
@load frameworks/software/vulnerable 
# Detect software changing (e.g. attacker installing hacked SSHD). 
@load frameworks/software/version-changes 
# This adds signatures to detect cleartext forward and reverse windows shells. 
@load-sigs frameworks/signatures/detect-windows-shells 
# Uncomment the following line to begin receiving (by default hourly) emails 
# containing all of your notices. 
# redef Notice::policy += { [$action = Notice::ACTION_ALARM, $priority 
= 0] }; 
# Load all of the scripts that detect software in various protocols. 
@load protocols/ftp/software 
@load protocols/smtp/software 
@load protocols/ssh/software 
45 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
@load protocols/http/software 
# The detect-webapps script could possibly cause performance trouble when 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# running on live traffic. Enable it cautiously. 
#@load protocols/http/detect-webapps 
# This script detects DNS results pointing toward your Site::local_nets 
# where the name is not part of your local DNS zone and is being hosted 
# externally. Requires that the Site::local_zones variable is defined. 
@load protocols/dns/detect-external-names 
# Load dhcp script to log known devices 
@load protocols/dhcp/known-devices-and-hostnames 
# Script to detect various activity in FTP sessions. 
@load protocols/ftp/detect 
# Scripts that do asset tracking. 
@load protocols/conn/known-hosts 
@load protocols/conn/known-services 
@load protocols/ssl/known-certs 
# This script enables SSL/TLS certificate validation. 
@load protocols/ssl/validate-certs 
# Check for SSL Heartbleed attack 
@load protocols/ssl/heartbleed 
# Check for weak keys 
@load protocols/ssl/weak-keys 
# Check for expiring certs 
46 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
@load protocols/ssl/expiring-certs 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# Uncomment the following line to check each SSL certificate hash against the ICSI 
# certificate notary service; see http://notary.icsi.berkeley.edu . 
@load protocols/ssl/notary 
# If you have libGeoIP support built in, do some geographic detections and 
# logging for SSH traffic. 
@load protocols/ssh/geo-data 
# Detect hosts doing SSH bruteforce attacks. 
@load protocols/ssh/detect-bruteforcing 
# Detect logins using "interesting" hostnames. 
@load protocols/ssh/interesting-hostnames 
# Detect SQL injection attacks. 
@load protocols/http/detect-sqli 
const feed_directory = "/usr/local/bro_intel"; 
# Intelligence framework 
#@load policy/frameworks/intel/seen 
#@load policy/frameworks/intel/do_notice 
@load frameworks/intel/seen 
@load frameworks/intel/do_notice 
#@load policy/integration/collective-intel 
#redef Intel::read_files += { 
# feed_directory + "/mandiant.intel", 
# feed_directory + "/tor.intel", 
# feed_directory + "/alienvault.intel", 
47 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
##"/usr/local/bro/share/bro/site/bad_domains.txt", 
##"/somewhere/yourdata1.txt", 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
#}; 
redef Intel::read_files += { "/usr/local/bro_intel/mandiant.intel", 
"/usr/local/bro_intel/tor.intel", "/usr/local/bro_intel/alienvault.intel", 
}; 
#### Network File Handling #### 
# Enable MD5 and SHA1 hashing for all files. 
@load frameworks/files/hash-all-files 
# Detect SHA1 sums in Team Cymru's Malware Hash Registry. 
@load frameworks/files/detect-MHR 
# Extract collected files 
#@load extract_files 
# this is the original malware_detect using perl and clamavd 
#@load malware_detect 
# can define this stuff here or in the site specific .bro scripts 
#redef Communication::listen_port = 47777/tcp; 
#redef Communication::nodes += { 
# ["broping"] = [$host = 127.0.0.1, $class="broping", $events = /ping/, 
$connect = F, $ssl = F], 
# ["malware_detect"] = [$host = 127.0.0.1, $class="malware_detect", 
$events = /malware_message/, $connect= F, $ssl = F] 
#}; 
#@load malware1 
48 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
#@load broccoli 
#@load whitelisting 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
#@load broping 
event bro_init() { Analyzer::disable_analyzer(Analyzer::ANALYZER_SYSLOG); 
} 
#event bro_init() 
# { 
# local f = Log::get_filter(Notice::ALARM_LOG, "alarm-mail"); 
# f$interv = 1day; 
# Log::add_filter(Notice::ALARM_LOG, f); 
# } 
/opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local/server.conf 
[sslConfig] 
sslKeysfilePassword = $1$2OJs1XSIp3Un 
[lmpool:auto_generated_pool_forwarder] description = auto_generated_pool_forwarder 
quota = MAX 
slaves = * 
stack_id = forwarder [lmpool:auto_generated_pool_free] description = 
auto_generated_pool_free quota = MAX 
slaves = * stack_id = free 
[general] 
pass4SymmKey = $1$j644iTHO7Ccn serverName = bro 
/opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local/inputs.conf 
[default] host = bro 
sourcetype=BroLogs index=bro 
49 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
[monitor:///usr/local/bro/logs/current/notice.log] sourcetype=bro_notice 
[monitor:///usr/local/bro/logs/current/weird.log] sourcetype=bro_weird 
[monitor:///usr/local/bro/logs/current/ssl.log] sourcetype=bro_ssl 
[monitor:///usr/local/bro/logs/current/ssh.log] sourcetype=bro_ssh 
[monitor:///usr/local/bro/logs/current/software.log] sourcetype=bro_software 
[monitor:///usr/local/bro/logs/current/intel.log] sourcetype=bro_intel 
[monitor:///usr/local/bro/logs/current/http.log] sourcetype=bro_http 
[monitor:///usr/local/bro/logs/current/conn.log] sourcetype=bro_conn 
[monitor:///usr/local/bro/logs/current/x509.log] sourcetype=bro_x509 
[monitor:///usr/local/bro/logs/current/dns.log] sourcetype=bro_dns 
#[monitor:///usr/local/bro/logs/current/*.log] 
#host=bro-worker1 
#sourcetype=BroLogs 
#index=bro 
#[monitor:///opt/splunkforwarder/var/log/splunk/splunkd.log] 
/opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local/outputs.conf 
[tcpout] 
defaultGroup = splunkssl 
[tcpout:splunkssl] server = loghost:9997 compressed = true 
sslVerifyServerCert = false 
sslRootCAPath = $SPLUNK_HOME/etc/certs/CAServerCert.pem sslCertPath = 
$SPLUNK_HOME/etc/certs/bro-worker1.pem sslPassword = $1$23DtXas9IZD8 
3.4 CA Technologies IT Asset Manager 
CA Technologies IT Asset Manager (CA ITAM) allows you to holistically manage IT hardware assets, from 
planning and requisition to retirement and disposal. This solution helps to rein in IT costs and boost 
return on investment by identifying underutilized hardware assets, improving hardware usage profiles, 
managing contracts and usage patterns, and giving you a thorough understanding of the true costs of 
your IT asset base. 
3.4.1 
How It’s Used 
In the FS ITAM build, CA ITAM is used to track hardware assets from requisition to disposal. Data 
collected during this task will be analyzed and used to notify an administrator of a change in the network 
50 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
architecture. When a new hardware asset is received, an administrator will enter into the database 
information that includes, but is not limited to, the asset name, host name, operating system, serial 
number, owner, location, mac address and IP address. The data is then stored for retrieval by Splunk 
Enterprise. For this build, the CA ITAM database is pre-loaded with data from machines being used 
throughout the ITAM architecture. The Tier 1 ITAM server is connected to the CA ITAM database to 
query data stored in the CA ITAM resource tables. 
3.4.2 
Virtual Machine Configuration 
The CA ITAM virtual machine is configured with one network interface cards, 16 GB of RAM, two CPU 
cores, a 40 GB hard drive, and another 100 GB hard drive. The 100 GB of hard drive space is very 
important for this machine. 
3.4.3 
Network Configuration 
The management network interface card is configured as follows: 
▪ IPv4 Manual 
▪ IPv6 Disabled 
▪ IP Address: 172.16.3.92 
▪ Netmask: 255.255.255.0 
▪ Gateway: 172.16.3.11 
▪ DNS Servers: 172.16.1.20, 172.16.1.21 
▪ Search Domains: lab5.nccoe.gov 
3.4.4 
Installing CA ITAM 
CA ITAM is installed on a clean 64-bit Windows Server 2012 R2 image with default Windows firewall 
configurations. Installation configurations are default for this build and are documented online by CA 
Technologies. CA Technologies installation guidelines can be found online at the following URL: 
https://support.ca.com/cadocs/0/CA%20IT%20Asset%20Manager%2012%208
ENU/Bookshelf_Files/PDF/APM_Impl_ENU.pdf. 
Prerequisites for this build are as follows: 
▪ Java 7 JRE (32-bit) 
• Set the JAVA_HOME variable 
▪ SQL Server 2012 with 
• Database Engine 
51 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
• Backwards Compatibility 
• Client Connectivity 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
• Management tools 
• Used mixed authentication as the authentication method 
▪ NET Framework 3.5 
▪ NET Framework 4.5 
• Select ASP.NET 
▪ IIS 
Note: Make sure the application server supports the IIS under add roles and features 
▪ CA Business Intelligence Server 
▪ CA Embedded Entitlements Manager 
3.4.5 
Configurations 
Once installed, the data importer engine is used to import data from a .CSV file into the MDB. The file is 
obtained from the Belarc Server, which exports data into a .CSV file. Then the file is copied onto the CA 
ITAM Server. 
1. Save the .CSV file in \CA\ITAM\Storage\Common Store\Import. 
52 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
The file contains data with the following field names: ProfileName, NetworkMACAddress, 
ComputerDomain, OperatingSystem, OSProductOptions, OSServicePack, SystemSerialNumber. 
A snippet of the .CSV file is displayed in the following figure: 
2. Open the CA Data Importer by logging into CA ITAM with administrator privileges and navigate 
to Administration > Data Importer > New Import. 
3. In the Administration tab, specify these settings: 
a. Name: <Name> 
b. Data File: <filename> 
c. Main Destination Object: Asset(Computer) 
d. Select First Row Has Column Names 
e. Data File Locale: English (United States) 
f. 
Data Delimiter: {Comma} 
4. In Advanced Settings, select all three check boxes. 
53 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
5. Save the import. 
6. Under Mapping, select Load Source Fields. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
7. Map the Source Fields to the Destination Fields using the following rules: 
a. Computer domain = Asset.Host Name 
b. NetworkIPAddress = Asset.IP Address 
c. NetworkMACAddress = Asset.MAC Address 
d. OperatingSystem = Asset.Model.Model Name 
e. OSProductOptions = Asset.Asset Type Hierarchy.Class.Value 
f. 
OSServicePack = Asset.Asset Type Hierarchy.Subclass.Value 
g. ProfileName = Asset.Asset Name 
h. SystemSerialNumber = Asset.Serial Number 
8. Under the Schedule, upload the .CSV data file again and Submit. Make sure that the data import 
service is running. 
9. Check the status of the job under Import Jobs. 
10. Use the data stored in the MDB to run a query through the Splunk DB Connection (See 
Section 2.1.1, Splunk Enterprise, to configure.). 
11. Query is as follows: 
SELECT DISTINCT 
aud_ca_owned_resource.resource_name,audit_mode_uuid,audit_resource_class,au 
dit_resource_subclass,ca_owned_resource.own_resource_id,ca_owned_resource.m 
ac_address,ca_owned_resource.ip_address,ca_owned_resource.host_name,ca_owne 
d_resource.serial_number,ca_owned_resource.asset_source_uuid,ca_owned_resou 
rce.creation_user,ca_owned_resource.creation_date 
FROM aud_ca_owned_resource INNER JOIN ca_owned_resource 
ON aud_ca_owned_resource.resource_name = ca_owned_resource.resource_name 
3.5 Fathom Sensor from RedJack 
Fathom Sensor passively scans network traffic analyzing and reporting on netflow and cleartext banner 
information crossing the network. DNS and http traffic are also analyzed. Fathom Sensor detects 
anomalies on the network by analyzing these data streams. 
54 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3.5.1 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
How It’s Used 
Fathom Sensor passively monitors, captures, and optionally forwards summarized network traffic to its 
service running on the Amazon AWS cloud. The data on the Amazon server is then analyzed by RedJack 
to detect anomalies. The data is also aggregated with data from other organizations to detect attack 
trends. 
3.5.2 
Virtual Machine Configuration 
The FathomSensor1 virtual machine is configured with 2 network interface cards (1 card for access and 1 
for sniffing traffic), 16 GB of RAM, 1 CPU cores and 16 GB of hard drive space. 
3.5.3 
Network Configuration 
The management network interface card is configured as such: 
▪ IPv4 Manual 
▪ IPv6 Disabled 
▪ IP Address: 172.16.0.50 
▪ No IP address for the second network interface card Netmask: 255.255.255.0 
▪ Gateway: 172.16.0.11 
▪ DNS Servers: 172.16.1.20, 172.16.1.21 
▪ Search Domains: lab5.nccoe.gov 
3.5.4 
Installing Fathom Sensor 
3.5.4.1 VM Deployments 
This document will track the best-practices for provisioning, installing, and deploying the fathom-sensor 
in a virtual machine (VM). 
3.5.4.2 Requirements 
Fathom Sensor VM requirements vary based on the size, traffic volume, and complexity of the network. 
The most important factor for performance is RAM. A small business network of <50 devices might be 
safe on a VM with 16GB RAM, where as a large enterprise gateway may require 32-64GB RAM and 
dedicated hardware. 
Fathom Sensor will continue to operate in a degraded state if it becomes resource starved, but it is best 
to start high. 
55 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3.5.4.3 Configure the VM 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
When creating the virtual machine, create two network interfaces, one for management, and one for 
monitoring. The monitoring interface must be set to promiscuous mode. 
Instructions vary by VM platform and host, but this is covered here: 
▪ ESX – [KB: 
1004099](http://kb.vmware.com/selfservice/microsites/search.do?language=en_US&cmd=dis 
playKC&externalId=1004099) 
▪ Linux – [KB: 
287](http://kb.vmware.com/selfservice/microsites/search.do?language=en_US&cmd=displayK 
C&externalId=287) 
▪ Fusion – Password prompt can be disabled under Preferences > Network. 
3.5.4.4 Install CentOS 7 Minimal 
Our reference platform is CentOS 7 x64. Install (using USB or ISO or whatever) a minimal install. 
3.5.4.5 Configure OS 
Note: The following is based on the aforementioned VM with 2 NICs, one management NIC (eno1...) and 
one monitoring NIC (eno2...). 
Before beginning the configuration, you should collect the following information: IP/Netmask/Gateway 
for management interface. This will need Internet access on port 80 and 443. Optionally, you can use 
DHCP. 
172.16.0.50 
DNS server. This can be a local (to the customer) DNS server, or public (8.8.8.8, 4.2.2.4), however the 
latter will require firewall rules. Optionally, DHCP can configure this, however it needs to be set as 
above. 
172.16.1.20, 172.16.1.21 
NTP Server. This can be a local (to the customer), or a public (0.centos.pool.ntp.org) server, however the 
latter will require firewall rules. 
172.16.0.11 
NICs can be obscurely named, especially in VM environments. List all interfaces with: # ip addr. 
3.5.4.6 Configure the Management Network with a Static IP 
# /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/ifcfg-eno1 
56 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
BOOTPROTO=static IPADDR=172.16.0.50 NETMASK=255.255.255.0 ONBOOT=yes 
3.5.4.7 Configure the Monitoring Interface Without an IP 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
1. Configure the monitoring interface without an IP: 
# /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/ifcfg-eno2 
BOOTPROTO=static ONBOOT=yes 
2. Disable IPv6 autoconfiguration on the monitoring interface: 
# sysctl -w net.ipv6.conf.eno2.disable_ipv6=1 
3.5.4.8 Configure DNS 
# vi /etc/resolv.conf 
search lab5.nccoe.gov 
nameserver 172.16.1.20 
nameserver 172.16.1.21 
3.5.4.9 Set the Hostname 
# hostnamectl set-hostname fathomsensor1 
# vi /etc/hosts 
127.0.0.1 localhost 
172.16.0.50 fathomsensor1 
3.5.4.10 Adjust the Packages 
1. Not required, but if you are planning to install VMWare Tools, you need 
$ yum install perl net-tools gcc kernel-devel 
2. Install basic tools 
$ yum install ntp bash-completion net-tools wget curl lsof tcpdump psmisc 
3.5.4.11 Remove Unnecessary Packages 
$ systemctl stop postfix chronyd avahi-daemon.socket avahi-daemon.service 
$ systemctl disable avahi-daemon.socket avahi-daemon.service 
$ yum remove postfix chronyd avahi-autoipd avahi-libs avahi 
3.5.4.12 Disable SELinux 
# vi /etc/selinux/config 
57 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
SELINUX=permissive 
3.5.4.13 Limit SSH 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# vi /etc/ssh/sshd_config 
ListenAddress 172.16.0.50 
3.5.4.14 NTP 
Some VM platforms or configurations will provide a synchronized system clock. If you know this is the 
case, you can skip this section. 
#vi /etc/ntp.conf 
driftfile /var/lib/ntp/drift 
restrict default nomodify notrap nopeer noquery 
server 0.centos.pool.ntp.org iburst 
server 1.centos.pool.ntp.org iburst 
server 2.centos.pool.ntp.org iburst 
server 3.centos.pool.ntp.org iburst 
includefile  /etc/ntp/crypto/pw 
keys /etc/ntp/keys 
disable monitor 
1. Limit NTP to only listening on the management interface: 
#vi 
/etc/sysconfig/ntpd 
OPTIONS="-g -I eno1 -I 172.16.0.50" 
2. Before deployment, make sure the hardware clock is set to something reasonably correct: 
$ ntpdate 172.16.0.11 
$ hwclock -w 
3. Set NTP to start: 
$ systemctl enable ntpd 
$ systemctl start ntpd 
58 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3.5.4.15 CollectD 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
We use collectd to keep track of system (and fathom metrics) and report those metrics back to 
customer-metrics.redjack.com every 60 seconds. 
1. First, we need to install it from EPEL (version number will change): 
#yum install 
http://dl.fedoraproject.org/pub/epel/7/x86_64/e/epel-release-7-5.noarc h.rpm 
#yum install collectd collectd-netlink 
2. Then install the collectd config file, which will have a URL specific for this sensor, which we've 
been using as the sensor UUID. 
3. Then enable collectd: 
$ systemctl enable collectd 
$ systemctl start collectd 
3.5.4.16 Install Fathom-Sensor 
1. First install all the sensor RPMs: 
$ sudo yum install *.rpm 
2. Assuming that you have built a sensor config with `fathom-admin`: 
$ cp fathom-sensor1.conf /etc/fathom/fathom-sensor.conf 
$ chown fathom:fathom /etc/fathom/fathom-sensor.conf 
$ chmod 600 /etc/fathom/fathom-sensor.conf 
3. Edit the sensor config to make sure that it is listening to the correct device: 
# vi /etc/fathom/fathom-sensor.conf 
FATHOM_SENSOR_NETWORK_DEVICE=eno2 
3.5.4.17 Update Dynamic Run-Time Bindings 
1. Update dynamic run-time bindings because sometimes it needs it: 
$ ldconfig 
2. Then enable the “dedicated” version of the sensor. This has some hardcore properties in it that 
will reboot if there are continual problems: 
$ systemctl enable fathom-sensor-dedicated 
$ systemctl start fathom-sensor-dedicated 
59 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3.5.4.18 Install and Configure Amazon S3 Command Line Tools Using PIP 
1. Go to http://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/installing.html. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
2. Verify that you have at least Python 2.7: 
$ python -version 
3. Download the pip installation script: 
$ curl -O https://bootstrap.pypa.io/get-pip.py 
4. Run the pip installation script: 
$ sudo python get-pip.py 
5. Install the AWS CLI: 
$ sudo pip install awscli 
3.5.4.19 Configure AWS CLI 
1. Configure AWS CLI: 
#aws configure 
2. You will get the data to configure AWS CLI from the fathom-sensor.conf file. We want the data 
in JSON format. 
AWS Access Key ID = FATHOM_SENSOR_AWS_ACCESS_KEY 
AWS Secret Access Key = FATHOM_SENSOR_AWS_SECRET_KEY Default region Name = None 
Default output format = json 
3. Create a directory to save the files gathered from Amazon AWS: 
#mkdir /opt/fathom-sync 
4. Create a script to sync data with the Amazon AWS: 
#vi /usr/local/bin/fathom-sync.sh 
5. Copy the following lines into fathom-sync.sh. Replace <SENSOR ID> with your individual sensor 
ID. 
#!/bin/sh 
/bin/aws s3 sync s3://fathom-pipeline/json/nccoe/<SENSOR ID>/ /opt/fathom-sync 
6. Make the script executable: 
#chmod +x /usr/local/bin/fathom-sync 
60 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
7. Make the script run every hour by placing a link in /etc/cron.hourly: 
#cd /etc/cron.hourly 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
#ln -s /usr/local/bin/fathom-sync.sh /etc/cron.hourly/fathom-sync 
3.5.5 
Installing Splunk Universal Forwarder 
Note: You will need a Splunk account to download the Splunk Universal Forwarder. It is free and can be 
setup at: https://www.splunk.com/page/sign_up. 
1. Download the Splunk Universal Forwarder from: http://www.splunk.com/en_us/download/uni
versal-forwarder.html. 
2. Use the latest version for OS version 2.6+ kernel Linux distributions (64-bit). Since 
this is installing on Ubuntu select the file that ends in .deb. An example is:  
splunkforwader-6.2.5-272645-linux-2.6-amd64.deb 
Detailed installation instructions can be found at: 
http://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/Splunk/6.2.3/Installation/InstallonLinux. 
3. An abridged version follows: 
rpm -i <splunk_package_name.deb> 
Example: rpm -i splunkforwader-6.2.4-271043-linux-2.6-x86_64.rpm 
4. This will install in /opt/splunkforwarder: 
cd /opt/splunkforwarder/bin 
./splunk start --accept-license 
./splunk enable boot-start 
5. Add forwarder: 
More info about adding a forwarder can be found at: 
http://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/Splunk/6.2.3/Forwarding/Deployanixdfmanually. 
cd /opt/splunkforwarder/bin 
./splunk add forward-server loghost:9997 -auth admin:changme 
61 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3.5.6 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Configuring Splunk Universal Forwarder 
Configuring Splunk Universal Forwarder as shown in the FS-ITAM use case requires X.509 Certificates for 
the Splunk Enterprise server/indexer and each Splunk Universal Forwarder. You will also need a copy of 
your certificate authority's public certificate. 
1. Create a directory to hold your certificates: 
mkdir /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/certs 
2. Copy your certificates in PEM format to /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/certs: 
cp CAServerCert.pem /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/certs 
cp fathomsensor1.lab5.nccoe.pem /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/certs 
3. Copy Splunk Universal Forwarder configuration files: 
cp <server.conf> /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local 
cp <inputs.conf> /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local 
cp <outputs.conf> /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local 
4. Modify server.conf so that: 
ServerName=Bro is your hostname. 
sslKeysfilePassword = <password for your private key> 
5. Modify outputs.conf so that: 
Server = loghost:9997 is your correct Splunk Enterprise server/indexer and port. 
sslPassword = <password of your certificate private key> 
Note: this will be hashed and not clear text after a restart. 
3.5.7 
Helpful Commands and Information 
The following commands could prove useful when working with Amazon Web Servers S3. Replace 
<SENSOR ID> with your individual sensor ID. 
1. List your sensor(s): 
aws s3 ls s3://fathom-pipeline/json/nccoe/ 
2. List data types for a sensor: 
aws s3 ls s3://fathom-pipeline/json/nccoe/<SENSOR ID>/ 
62 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3. List dates for the client-banner data type: 
aws s3 ls s3://fathom-pipeline/json/nccoe/<SENSOR ID>/client-banner/ 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
4. List individual JSON files on that date: 
aws s3 ls 
s3://fathom-pipeline/json/nccoe/<SENSOR ID>/client-banner/20150604/ 
5. The following command will convert from a certificate in PKCS12 format to PEM format: 
openssl pkcs12 -in certificate.pfx -out certificate.cer -nodes 
3.5.8 
Configurations and Scripts 
/opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local/server.conf 
[sslConfig] 
sslKeysfilePassword = $1$2OJs1XSIp3Un 
[lmpool:auto_generated_pool_forwarder] description = auto_generated_pool_forwarder 
quota = MAX 
slaves = * 
stack_id = forwarder 
[lmpool:auto_generated_pool_free] description = auto_generated_pool_free quota = MAX 
slaves = * stack_id = free 
[general] 
pass4SymmKey  =  $1$j644iTHO7Ccn serverName = fathomsensor1.lab5.nccoe.gov 
/opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local/inputs.conf 
[default] 
host = fathomsensor1.lab5.nccoe.gov sourcetype=fathomsensor index=fathom 
[monitor:///opt/fathom-sync/*/client-banner*] 
/opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local/outputs.conf [tcpout] 
defaultGroup = splunkssl 
63 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
[tcpout:splunkssl] server = loghost:9997 compressed = true 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
sslVerifyServerCert = false 
sslRootCAPath = $SPLUNK_HOME/etc/certs/CAServerCert.pem 
sslCertPath = $SPLUNK_HOME/etc/certs/fathomsensor1.lab5.nccoe.gov.pem sslPassword = 
$1$23DtXas9IZD8 
3.6 OpenVAS 
OpenVAS is an open-source network vulnerability scanner and manager. OpenVAS runs customizable 
scans and generates reports in multiple formats. OpenVAS is also a framework, and additional tools can 
be added to it. 
3.6.1 
How It’s Used 
In the FS ITAM build, OpenVAS automatically runs vulnerability scans on all systems connected to the 
network. Every machine is scanned at least once a week. OpenVAS collects the information, stores it in a 
database, and creates reports. OpenVAS can also download the latest vulnerabilities along with their 
CVE and NVT information. 
On the high-level architecture diagram, OpenVAS is in Tier 2. OpenVAS utilizes the Splunk Universal 
Forwarder to send reports to Splunk Enterprise. Information is extracted from the OpenVAS database 
every hour, and any new records are forwarded to Splunk Enterprise. Splunk Enterprise uses the 
information from OpenVAS to provide context to analysts regarding the security of individual systems as 
well as aggregating statistics to show the overall organizational security posture. 
3.6.2 
Virtual Machine Configuration 
The OpenVAS virtual machine is configured with one network interface card, 16 GB of RAM and four 
CPU cores. 
3.6.3 
Network Configuration 
The management network interface card is configured as follows: 
▪ IPv4 Manual 
▪ IPv6 Ignore/Disabled 
▪ IP Address: 172.16.2.33 
▪ Netmask: 255.255.255.0 
▪ Gateway: 172.16.2.11 
64 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
▪ DNS Servers: 172.16.1.20, 172.16.1.21 
▪ Search Domains: lab5.nccoe.gov 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-use-openvas-to-audit-the-securit y-of
remote-systems-on-ubuntu-12-04 
3.6.4 
Installation Prerequisites 
sudo apt-get update 
sudo apt-get install python-software-properties 
sudo apt-get install sqlite3 xsltproc texlive-latex-base 
texlive-latex-extra texlive-latex-recommended htmldoc alien rpm nsis fakeroot 
3.6.5 
Installing OpenVAS 
OpenVAS is installed on a hardened Ubuntu 14.04 Linux system. Please download the latest source 
package from OpenVAS and follow the instructions for installing from source. 
Installation was performed following the instructions gathered from the following web sites:  
▪ http://www.openvas.org/ 
▪ https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-use-openvas-to-audit-the-securit 
y-of-remote-systems-on-ubuntu-12-04 
▪ https://launchpad.net/~openvas/+archive/ubuntu/openvas6 
1. Add new file in /etc/apt/sources.list.d/openvas-openvas6-trusty.list: 
deb http://ppa.launchpad.net/openvas/openvas6/ubuntu precise main 
deb-src http://ppa.launchpad.net/openvas/openvas6/ubuntu precise main 
sudo apt-get install openvas-manager openvas-scanner 
openvas-administrator openvas-cli greenbone-security-assistant sudo openvas
mkcert 
2. Answer the questions for the new certificate: 
sudo openvas-mkcert-client -n om -i 
3. Download and build the vulnerability database: 
sudo openvas-nvt-sync 
65 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
4. Stop the services: 
sudo service openvas-manager stop 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
sudo service openvas-scanner stop 
5. Start the scanner application (this will download and sync a lot of data): 
sudo openvassd 
6. Rebuild the database: 
sudo openvasmd --rebuild 
7. Download and sync SCAP data: 
sudo openvas-scapdata-sync 
8. Download and sync cert data: 
sudo openvas-certdata-sync 
Note: You will most likely get an error because the Ubuntu package is missing some files. 
9. The following commands will get the files from the Fedora package and install them in the cor
rect location: 
cd 
wget http://www6.atomicorp.com/channels/atomic/fedora/18/i386/RPMS/openvas- 
manager-5.0.8-27.fc18.art.i686.rpm 
sudo apt-get install rpm2cpio 
rpm2cpio openvas* | cpio -div 
sudo mkdir /usr/share/openvas/cert 
sudo cp ./usr/share/openvas/cert/* /usr/share/openvas/cert 
10. Now sync the certs, and everything should work: 
sudo openvas-certdata-sync 
11. Add user and permissions: 
sudo openvasad -c add_user -n admin -r Admin 
12. Edit the following file and insert your OpenVAS IP address: 
sudo nano /etc/default/greenbone-security-assistant 
13. Start up the services: 
sudo killall openvassd 
66 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
sudo service openvas-scanner start sudo service openvas-manager start 
sudo service openvas-administrator restart 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
sudo service greenbone-security-assistant restart 
14. Enable start up at boot time: 
sudo update-rc.d openvas-scanner enable 2 3 4 5 
sudo update-rc.d openvas-manager enable 2 3 4 5 
sudo update-rc.d openvas-administrator enable 2 3 4 5 
sudo update-rc.d greenbone-security-assistant enable 2 3 4 5 
15. Try it out. Point your web browser to: 
https://localhost:9392 
https://172.16.2.33:9292 
Note: It must be https. 
3.6.6 
Configuring OpenVAS 
Full user documentation can be found at: http://docs.greenbone.net/index.html#user_documentation. 
OpenVAS supports immediate scans and scheduled scans. Scheduled scans enable full automation of 
scanning and reporting. 
1. Set up schedules: 
a. Configuration > Schedules. 
b. Click the Star icon to create a new schedule. 
c. Create a schedule for every day of the week. Example: Monday scans - every day at 
21:00. 
d. Do the same for the other 6 days of the week. 
2. Setup targets: 
A target is an individual system to scan or a range of systems to scan. In the FS-ITAM lab a 
separate target was configured for each subnet. 
a. Configuration > Targets. 
67 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
b. Click the Star icon to create a new target. 
Example: 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Name: Network Security. 
Hosts: 172.16.2.1-172.16.2.254. 
Comment: Network Security systems. 
c. Click Create Target button to save. 
3. Set up tasks: 
A task is something that is done to a target. So we need to setup a scan on each target. 
a. Scan Management > New Task. 
Name: Scan DMZ 
Comment: Scan the DMZ systems 
Scan Config: Full and fast 
Scan Targets: DMZ (this is why the target must exist before the task). 
Schedule: Tuesday scan (this is why the schedule must exist before the task). 
b. Click the Create Task button to save. 
c. Continue adding all of the tasks that you need - one for each target. 
3.6.6.1 Openvas_results.py 
The openvas_results.py is a Python script that accesses the OpenVAS Sqlite3 database, extracts 
interesting values and then writes those to files in CSV and JSON formats. 
The openvas_results.py is run by cron every hour to check for new results from OpenVAS scans. 
The Splunk Universal Forwarder checks the CSV file written by openvas_results.py for any changes and 
sends those to the Splunk Enterprise server/indexer. 
1. Place openvas_results.py in /root and make sure that it is executable: 
cp <openvas_results.py> /root 
chmod +x /root/openvas_results.py 
2. Create a symbolic link in /etc/cron.hourly so that openvas_results.py runs every hour: 
ln -s /root/openvas_results.py /etc/cron.daily/openvas_results 
68 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3.6.7 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Installing Splunk Universal Forwarder 
Note: You will need a Splunk account to download the Splunk Universal Forwarder. It is free and can be 
set up at: https://www.splunk.com/page/sign_up. 
1. Download the Splunk Universal Forwarder from: http://www.splunk.com/en_us/download/uni
versal-forwarder.html. 
2. You want the latest version for OS version 2.6+ kernel Linux distributions (64-bit). 
Since this is installing on Ubuntu, select the file that ends in .deb. An example is: 
splunkforwader-6.2.5-272645-linux-2.6-amd64.deb 
Detailed installation instructions can be found at: 
http://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/Splunk/6.2.3/Installation/InstallonLinux. 
3. An abridged version follows: 
dpkg -i <splunk_package_name.deb> 
Example: dpkg -i splunkforwader-6.2.5-272645-linux-2.6-amd64.deb 
4. This will install in /opt/splunkforwarder: 
cd /opt/splunkforwarder/bin 
./splunk start --accept-license 
./splunk enable boot-start 
5. Add forwarder: 
More information about adding a forwarder can be found at: 
http://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/Splunk/6.2.3/Forwarding/Deployanixdfmanually. 
cd /opt/splunkforwarder/bin 
./splunk add forward-server loghost:9997 -auth admin:changme 
3.6.8 
Configuring Splunk Universal Forwarder 
Configuring Splunk Universal Forwarder as shown in the FS-ITAM use case requires X.509 Certificates for 
the Splunk Enterprise server/indexer and each Splunk Universal Forwarder. You will also need a copy of 
your certificate authority’s public certificate. 
1. Create a directory to hold your certificates: 
mkdir /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/certs 
69 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
2. Copy your certificates in PEM format to /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/certs: 
cp CAServerCert.pem /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/certs 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
cp bro_worker1.pem /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/certs 
3. Copy Splunk Universal Forwarder configuration files: 
cp <server.conf> /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local 
cp <inputs.conf> /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local 
cp <outputs.conf> /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local 
4. Modify server.conf so that: 
ServerName=openvascd is your hostname. 
sslKeysfilePassword = <password for your private key> 
5. Modify outputs.conf so that: 
Server = loghost:9997 is your correct Splunk Enterprise server/indexer and port. 
sslPassword = <password of your certificate private key> 
Note: This will be hashed and not clear text after a restart. 
Inputs.conf should work, but you are free to modify it to include the OpenVAS logs that you are 
interested in. 
3.6.9 
Configurations and Scripts 
/root/openvas_results.py 
#! /usr/bin/env python 
# 
# Gathers info from OpenVAS database and writes it to a CSV and JSON for 
SplunkForwarder 
# 
import os import os.path import sys 
from time import sleep 
from datetime import datetime import ntpath 
import errno import sqlite3 import csv import json 
# Global variables and configs 
70 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# SQLITE3 database file 
file_db = "/var/lib/openvas/mgr/tasks.db" 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# JSON file to write results to 
json_file = "/home/mike/openvas_results.json" 
# CSV file to write results to - actually tab delimited csv_file = 
"/home/mike/openvas_results.csv" 
# last_id is how we keep track of the last item added. This keeps us from re
processing old items. This value is kept in the openvas_state.txt file 
last_id = 0 
#openvas_state.txt - change this to 0 if you want to start over openvas_state_file = 
"/home/mike/openvas_state.txt" 
# this is just a status of how many records have be processed. new_record_count = 0 
print "Getting OpenVAS reports" 
if os.path.isfile(openvas_state_file) and os.access(openvas_state_file, os.W_OK): 
openvas_state = open(openvas_state_file, 'r+') last_id = openvas_state.read() 
else: 
print "File %s does not exist, creating" % openvas_state_file 
#sys.exit() 
openvas_state = open(openvas_state_file, 'w') openvas_state.write('0') 
print "Last ID = ", last_id 
# stripped removes non-printable characters def stripped(x): 
return "".join([i for i in x if 31 < ord(i) < 127]) 
try: 
db_conn = sqlite3.connect(file_db, check_same_thread=False) except: 
print "Cannot connect to %s" % file_db sys.exit() 
db_cursor = db_conn.cursor() 
71 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
#query = """SELECT id, task, subnet, host, port, nvt, type, description, report from 
results""" 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
query = """SELECT results.id, results.task, results.subnet, results.host, 
results.port, results.nvt, results.type, results.description, results.report, 
nvts.name, nvts.description, 
nvts.cve, nvts.cvss_base, nvts.risk_factor from results LEFT JOIN nvts ON results.nvt 
= nvts.uuid ORDER BY results.id""" 
#field_names = ['id', 'task', 'subnet', 'host', 'port', 'nvt', 'type', 
'results_description', 'report', 'nvts_name', 'nvts_description', 'cve', 'cvss_base', 
'risk_factor'] 
csvfile = open(csv_file, 'a') 
csv_writer = csv.writer(csvfile, delimiter='\t', quotechar='|', 
quoting=csv.QUOTE_MINIMAL) 
jsonfile = open(json_file, 'a') 
for row in db_cursor.execute(query): 
#print row 
id = row[0] #this needs to be a number task = stripped(str(row[1])) 
subnet = stripped(str(row[2])) host = stripped(str(row[3])) port = 
stripped(str(row[4])) nvt = stripped(str(row[5])) type = stripped(str(row[6])) 
results_description = stripped(str(row[7])) report = stripped(str(row[8])) 
nvts_name = stripped(str(row[9])) nvts_description = stripped(str(row[10])) cve = 
stripped(str(row[11])) 
cvss_base = stripped(str(row[12])) risk_factor = stripped(str(row[13])) 
if int(id) > int(last_id): 
#print "Greater!" last_id = id openvas_state.seek(0,0) 
openvas_state.write(str(last_id)) new_record_count = new_record_count + 1 
csv_writer.writerow([id, task, subnet, host, port, nvt, type, results_description, 
report, nvts_name, nvts_description, cve, cvss_base, risk_factor]) 
72 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
json_dict = {'id': id, 'task': task, 'subnet': subnet, 'host': host, 'port': port, 
'nvt': nvt, 'type': type, 'results_description': results_description, 'report': 
report, 'nvts_name': nvts_name, 'nvts_description': nvts_description, 'cve': cve, 
'cvss_base': cvss_base, 'risk_factor': risk_factor} 
json.dump(json_dict, jsonfile, sort_keys = True, indent = 4, ensure_ascii = False) 
#print "ID: %s 
LAST: %s" % (id, last_id), print "\n" 
db_conn.close() csvfile.close() jsonfile.close() 
print "Wrote %s new records." % new_record_count 
/opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local/server.conf 
[sslConfig] 
sslKeysfilePassword = $1$JnofjmZL66ZH 
[lmpool:auto_generated_pool_forwarder] description = auto_generated_pool_forwarder 
quota = MAX 
slaves = * 
stack_id = forwarder 
[lmpool:auto_generated_pool_free] description = auto_generated_pool_free quota = MAX 
slaves = * stack_id = free 
[general] 
pass4SymmKey = $1$cTZL0iMNoPRH serverName = openvas 
/opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local/outputs.conf 
[tcpout] 
defaultGroup = splunkssl 
[tcpout:splunkssl] compressed = true server = loghost:9997 
sslCertPath = $SPLUNK_HOME/etc/certs/openvas.lab5.nccoe.gov.pem sslPassword = 
$1$JnofjmZL66ZH 
sslRootCAPath = $SPLUNK_HOME/etc/certs/CAServerCert.pem sslVerifyServerCert = true 
73 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
/opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local/inputs.conf 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
[default]  host = openvas 
index = openvas sourcetype = openvas 
[monitor:///home/mike/openvas_results.csv] 
3.7 Puppet Enterprise 
Puppet Enterprise enforces a configuration baseline on servers and workstations. Puppet agents 
installed on the hosts will run periodically, download a list of instructions referred to as a configuration 
catalog from the Master, and then execute it on the hosts. A successful Puppet Enterprise agent run can 
make configuration changes, install new software, remove unwanted software and send reports to the 
Master. 
3.7.1 
How It’s Used 
In the Financial Services ITAM solution, Puppet Enterprise is used to enforce a base configuration for all 
endpoints and to enforce basic security configurations. On the endpoints, it ensures that anti-virus 
software is installed, firewalls are enabled, IP forwarding is disabled, and the software asset 
management agent is installed. 
Reporting is also a feature that was extended in this solution. With the inclusion of customized scripts, 
Puppet Enterprise sends very valuable reports to the ITAM analysis engine. The reports include which 
endpoint has successfully uploaded reports to the Puppet Enterprise master. 
Failure to upload a report within a certain interval would indicate an anomaly with the endpoint or an 
off-line endpoint. Puppet Enterprise's functionality was extended to remove blacklisted software listed 
in a file made available from an analyst. A script was written to parse the file on a daily basis and inject 
the appropriate Puppet Enterprise code to remove such listed software. After successful removal, 
Puppet Enterprise writes a report identifying the offending endpoint, the uninstalled software and the 
time of removal. 
3.7.2 
Prerequisites 
Puppet Enterprise Server requires the following: 
▪ at least a four core CPU, 6 GB of RAM and 100 GB of hard drive space 
▪ network-wide name resolution via DNS 
▪ network-wide time synchronization using NTP 
74 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3.7.3 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Installing Puppet Enterprise Server 
Instructions for installing Puppet Enterprise can be found at 
http://docs.puppetlabs.com/pe/latest/install_pe_mono.html. 
1. Download the Puppet Enterprise tarball from the Puppet Labs web site. Use the instructions ref
erenced in the preceding link to locate and download the file. 
2. Run tar -xf <PuppetEnterpriseTarball> to unpack its contents. 
3. List directory with ls to view current directory contents. 
4. Change into the directory with name puppet-enterprise-<version>-<OSversion>. 
5. Execute sudo ./puppet-enterprise-installer. 
6. Connect to Puppet Enterprise Server console by going to: 
https://YourPuppetServerFQDN:3000. 
7. Accept the untrusted connection and make an exception to this site by storing it in your trusted 
list. 
8. Confirm the security exception. 
9. From Installation Web page, select Let's get started. 
10. Select Monolithic Installation. 
11. Choose Install on this Server. 
12. Do not enable the Puppet 4 language parser if your existing Puppet code was developed in Pup
pet 3.xx. 
13. Choose to install PostGreSQL on the same server. 
14. Supply a console password when prompted. 
3.7.4 
Puppet Enterprise Linux Agent Installation 
To install Puppet Enterprise agent on the same platform as the server: 
1. Enter curl -k https://YourPuppetServerFQDN:8140/packages/current/install.bash 
|sudo bash at the agent terminal. 
2. Request a certificate by typing puppet agent -t from the client node. 
3. Go to the Puppet Enterprise server Web console and log in. 
75 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
4. Accept node requests by clicking on the Node link. 
5. Click Accept to sign the Certificate. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
To install Puppet Enterprise agent on a different platform from the server: 
1. Go to the Puppet Enterprise Web console. 
2. Click on Classification. 
3. Select the PE Master Group. 
4. Click the Classes tab. 
5. Select your platform from the new class textbox dropdown. 
6. Click Add Class. 
7. Click Commit 1 Change. 
8. Run puppet agent -t to configure the newly assigned class. 
9. To install the agent, enter curl -k https://<YourPuppetServerFQDN>:8140/packages/cur
rent/install.bash | sudo bash. 
3.7.5 
Puppet Enterprise Windows Agent Installation 
To install Puppet Enterprise agent on a Windows computer: 
1. Make sure to start the installation file or log in to the system with an administrator account. 
2. Double-click the Puppet Enterprise executable file. 
3. Accept the default options. 
3.7.6 
Puppet Enterprise Agent Configuration 
1. Agents need to obtain certificates from the Puppet Enterprise Server/Master. Connect to the 
Puppet Enterprise Server console at https://PuppetEnterpriseServerFQDN. 
2. Log in to the console with your configured username and password. 
3. Click on Nodes. 
4. Accept Node requests from each agent you have configured. The agent’s fully qualified domain 
name (FQDN) will be displayed. 
5. A certificate request can be generated if you do not see one by typing puppet agent -t from 
the agent terminal. 
76 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
6. Certificate requests can be viewed from the Web console of Puppet Enterprise Server. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
7. Windows agents offer the option of using the graphical user interface by clicking on Start Pro
grams > Puppet Enterprise > Run Puppet Agent. 
8. Puppet agents fetch and apply configurations retrieved from the Puppet Enterprise Master 
Server. This agent run occurs every 30 minutes. You can change this interval by adding an entry 
to the /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/puppet.conf file. 
a. On Linux, add the entry runinterval = 12 to the main section of the /etc/pup
petlabs/puppet/puppet.conf file to have the agent run every 12 hours. 
b. On Windows, add the entry runinterval = 12 to the main section of the C:\Pro
gramData\PuppetLabs\puppet\etc\puppet.conf file to have the agent run every 
12 hours. 
3.7.7 
Puppet Enterprise Manifest Files and Modules 
The main configuration file, also called a manifest file in Puppet Enterprise, is 
/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/environments/production/manifests/site.pp. You can place all the Puppet 
Enterprise code here for agents to run. In our solution, we created modules, declared classes, and called 
those modules from within the site.pp file. 
A module consists of a parent directory that contains a file’s subdirectory and a manifest’s subdirectory. 
Within the manifests subdirectory will be another file called init.pp that contains the Puppet Enterprise 
77 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
code for that module. The init.pp file must have a class declaration statement. The files subdirectory can 
be empty or can contain files that need to be copied over to endpoints that will execute code in that 
module. All modules reside in the directory /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules. We have the following 
modules: 
▪ /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/windowsnodes 
▪ /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/ubuntubase 
▪ /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/redhatbase 
▪ /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/clamav 
▪ /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/blacklist 
Each has a files directory /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/<modulename>/files and a manifests 
directory with the /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/<modulename>/manifests/init.pp file. 
3.7.7.1 Module: windowsnodes 
This module configures a baseline for Windows endpoints. Execution of this module copies a number of 
executable files and the baseline.bat script over to the endpoints from the Puppet Enterprise Server. 
Once baseline.bat is executed on the endpoint, it will look for and install the copied over executable 
programs, which consist of the belmonitor.exe asset management software agent and an anti-virus 
software. The text of the /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/windowsnodes/init.pp manifest file is shown 
in the code and scripts section. 
3.7.7.2 Module: ubuntubase 
This module configures a baseline for Ubuntu endpoints. It installs software, disables IP forwarding, 
installs clamav anti-virus, and copies over files including a script dailyscript that runs daily and is placed 
in the /etc/cron.daily directory. You can use the same technique to ensure that your scripts remain 
where you want them. 
3.7.7.3 Module: redhatbase 
This module configures a baseline for RedHat or CentOS based endpoints. It disables IP forwarding on 
endpoints, copies over files including scripts that run periodically, ensures that the belmonitor asset 
management software is installed, and configures the logging to the appropriate logging server. 
78 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3.7.7.4 Module: clamav 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
This module installs clamav anti-virus on Ubuntu endpoints and ensures that the clamav-daemon service 
is running. 
class clamav{ 
package{'clamav-daemon': ensure=>installed, 
} 
service{'clamav-daemon': ensure=>running, require=>Package['clamav-daemon'], 
} 
} 
3.7.7.5 Module: blacklist 
This module removes blacklisted software from endpoints and reports success if the software package is 
removed. Its init.pp file is constantly being updated with new software slated for removal. A python 
script called blacklistenforcer.py is used to populate the module's 
/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/blacklist/manifests/init.pp file. Another python script is used to read 
reports from the /var/opt/lib/pe-puppet/reports/<HostFQDN> subdirectories to identify successfully 
removed blacklisted software. 
3.7.7.6 Software Blacklist Removal 
Puppet Enterprise Server is configured to remove blacklisted software from agent nodes. A python script 
placed in /etc/cron.daily directory runs daily, checking a blacklisted software. The python script will 
extract the software list from the file /etc/splunkreport/fakeblacklist.csv, write new Puppet code such 
that Puppet Enterprise catalog includes the blacklisted software, and identifies it to Puppet for removal. 
3.7.8 
Reporting 
Puppet agents forward reports of their runs to the Puppet Enterprise server. To ensure reporting is 
enabled, go to /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/puppet.conf and verify that an entry such as reports = 
console, puppetdb, store exists under master section of the file. 
Agents upload reports in the form of YAML files to /var/opt/lib/pe-puppet/reports/<agent_hostname>. 
In this solution, the Puppet Enterprise Server machine was set up to forward two basic reports to the 
ITAM server. Both were done with scripts. The first reporting function forwarded checked the fully 
qualified hostnames of endpoints that failed to upload reports to the server within two reporting cycles. 
79 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
If a reporting interval or cycle is 30 minutes, then failure to upload a report for more than an hour would 
indicate that an endpoint is offline and would trigger the forwarding of a syslog message to the ITAM 
server declaring the endpoint absent. Other endpoints that successfully upload reports without missing 
two cycles are declared present and send an appropriate message to the ITAM server. The script written 
that accomplishes this is written in BASH and is in the code and scripts section. 
The second reporting function reports on the successful removal of blacklisted software. It scans 
through the report files from all the nodes in Puppet Enterprise Server, identifies successfully removed 
software and updates the CSV file /etc/splunkreport/reporttosplunk.csv with information that identifies 
the endpoint, the successfully removed software and the time of removal. The Splunk Universal 
Forwarder agent monitors this file and forwards changes to the ITAM server, which uses Splunk 
Enterprise as its analysis engine. 
3.7.9 
Report Directory Cleanup 
Thousands of files could be uploaded to the reports directory in a short time. Therefore, it is important 
to delete files that are no longer needed. We used a python script that ran hourly to delete files 
modification times more than 12 hours old. In this solution, that is equivalent to files that are more than 
12 hours old. This script was placed in the /etc/cron.hourly. 
3.7.10 Puppet Code and Scripts 
3.7.10.1 Main Manifest Configuration File 
/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/environments/production/manifests/site.pp 
## site.pp ## 
# This file (/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/manifests/site.pp) is the main 
# entry point used when an agent connects to a master and asks for an # updated 
configuration. 
# 
# Global objects like filebuckets and resource defaults should go in 
# this file,as should the default node definition. (The default node 
# can be omitted 
# if you use the console and don't define any other nodes in site.pp. # See 
http://docs.puppetlabs.com/guides/language_guide.html#nodes for # more on node 
definitions.) 
80 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
## Active Configurations ## 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# PRIMARY FILEBUCKET 
# This configures puppet agent and puppet inspect to back up file 
# contents when they run. The Puppet Enterprise console needs this to # display file 
contents and differences. 
# Define filebucket 'main': filebucket { 'main': 
server => 'puppet.lab5.nccoe.gov', path => false, 
} 
# Make filebucket 'main' the default backup location for all File resources: 
File { backup => 'main' } 
# DEFAULT NODE 
# Node definitions in this file are merged with node data from the console. See 
# http://docs.puppetlabs.com/guides/language_guide.html#nodes for more 
# on node definitions. 
# The default node definition matches any node lacking a more specific 
# node definition. If there are no other nodes in this file, classes 
# declared here will be included in every node's catalog, *in 
# addition* to any classes specified in the console for that node. 
node default { 
# This is where you can declare classes for all nodes. 
# Example: 
# 
} 
class { 'my_class': } 
81 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
#Changes to the site.pp file were made below this line. 
#Nodes were specified with the modules that would execute 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
#on them 
node 'centos1', 'fathomsensor1'{ include redhatbase 
include blacklist 
} 
node 'ubuntu-client1', 'kibana', 'openvas', 'sensu', 'ubuntu-client2', 'wiki'{ 
include blacklist include ubuntubase package{'curl': 
ensure => installed, 
} 
} 
node 'ubuntu-template', 'jumpbox', 'bro', 'snort', 'apt-cache', 'warehouse'{ 
include blacklist include ubuntubase package{'curl': 
ensure => installed, 
} 
} 
node 'win7-client1', 'win7-client2', 'ad2', 'ad1', 'Belarc', 'eracent'{ include 
blacklist 
include windowsnodes 
} 
node 'asset-manager'{ include blacklist include windowsnodes 
} 
3.7.10.2 Windowsnodes Configuration File and Script 
/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/windowsnodes/manifests/init.pp 
#This manifest file declares a class called windowsnodes, creates a 
#C:\software directory, copies a number of files to the agent including the 
baseline.bat 
82 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
#script and executes the baseline.bat. When executed baseline.bat batch file installs 
#some programs and turns on the firewall and ensures the guest account is disabled 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
class windowsnodes{ file{'C:\software': 
ensure=>"directory", 
} 
file{'C:\software\baseline.bat': 
source => "puppet:///modules/windowsnodes/baseline.bat", source_permissions=>ignore, 
require => File['C:\software'], 
} 
file{'C:\software\belmonitor.exe': 
source => "puppet:///modules/windowsnodes/belmonitor.exe", source_permissions=>ignore, 
require => File['C:\software'], 
} 
file{'C:\software\mbamsetup.exe': 
source => "puppet:///modules/windowsnodes/mbamsetup.exe", source_permissions=>ignore, 
require => File['C:\software'], 
} 
exec{'win_baseline': 
command=>'C:\windows\system32\cmd.exe /c C:\software\baseline.bat', require => 
File['C:\software\belmonitor.exe'], 
} 
file{'C:\Program Files (x86)\nxlog\conf\nxlog.conf': source => 
"puppet:///modules/windowsnodes/nxlog.conf", source_permissions=>ignore, 
} 
} 
83 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/windowsnodes/files/baseline.bat 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
REM Install new user called newuser net user newuser /add 
REM Disable newuser 
net user newuser /active:no 
REM Disable the guest account net user guest /active:no 
REM Turn on firewall 
netsh advfirewall set allprofiles state on 
REM Use puppet to check if Malwarebytes is installed puppet resource package |find 
"Malwarebytes" 
REM Install Malwarebytes silently if not installed 
if %errorlevel% neq 0 C:\software\mbamsetup.exe /verysilent /norestart sc query |find 
"BelMonitorService" 
REM Install Belmonitor if the service is not running if %errorlevel% neq 0 
C:\software\belmonitor.exe 
3.7.10.3 Ubuntubase Configuration File and Script 
/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/ubuntubase/manifests/init.pp 
#This module configures a baseline for Ubuntu endpoints class ubuntubase{ 
#Copy over the CA certificate 
file{'/usr/local/share/ca-certificates/CAServerCert.crt': source => 
"puppet:///modules/ubuntubase/CAServerCert.crt", 
} 
# Add CA certificate to Ubuntu endpoint's repository of certificates exec{'update-ca
certificates': 
command=>'/usr/sbin/update-ca-certificates', 
} 
84 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
#Ensure the /etc/ufw directory is present or create it file{'/etc/ufw': 
ensure=>"directory", 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
} 
#Copy over the sysctl.conf file to each endpoint. IP forwarding will be 
#disabled file{'/etc/ufw/sysctl.conf': 
source => "puppet:///modules/ubuntubase/sysctl.conf", require => File['/etc/ufw'], 
} 
#Run the clamav module include clamav 
file{'/etc/cron.daily': ensure=>"directory", 
} 
file{'/etc/rsyslog.d': ensure=>"directory", 
} 
#Copy over this script to endpoint with associated permissions 
file{'/etc/cron.daily/dailyscript': 
source => "puppet:///modules/ubuntubase/dailyscript", mode => 754, 
require => File['/etc/cron.daily'], 
} 
#Copy over the 50-default.conf file with specified content file{'/etc/rsyslog.d/50
default.conf': 
content => "*.* @@loghost\n *.* /var/log/syslog", require => File['/etc/rsyslog.d'], 
} 
#Copy over Belmonitor Linux installation file file{'/opt/BelMonitorLinux': 
source => "puppet:///modules/ubuntubase/BelMonitorLinux", 
} 
85 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
#Make the BelMonitorLinux file executable exec{'belmonitor_executable': 
command=>'/bin/chmod a+x /opt/BelMonitorLinux', require=>File['/opt/BelMonitorLinux'], 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
} 
exec{'install_rpm': 
command=>'/usr/bin/apt-get install -y rpm', require=>File['/opt/BelMonitorLinux'] 
} 
##Install 32 bit library exec{'install_32bitlibrary': 
command=>'/usr/bin/apt-get install -y gcc-multilib', require=>Exec['install_rpm'], 
} 
##install 32 bit library exec{'install_second_32bit_library': 
command=> '/usr/bin/apt-get install -y lib32stdc++6', 
} 
exec{'install_belmonitor': command=>'/opt/BelMonitorLinux', 
require=>Exec['install_32bitlibrary'], 
} 
service{'BelMonitor': ensure=>'running', 
} 
} 
/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/ubuntubase/files/dailyscript 
#!/bin/bash df -kh mount 
netstat -nult ifconfig -a iptables -L 
/usr/bin/freshclam 
cat /var/lib/apt/extended_states apt-get update 
86 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3.7.10.4 Redhatbase Module Configuration File and Script 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/redhatbase/manifests/init.pp 
class redhatbase{ 
#Copies over a customized sysctl.conf that disables IP forwarding 
file{'/etc/sysctl.conf': 
source => "puppet:///modules/redhatbase/sysctl.conf", 
} 
#Ensures that cron.daily directory is present or creates it file{'/etc/cron.daily': 
ensure=>"directory", 
} 
file{'/etc/rsyslog.d': ensure=>"directory", 
} 
#Copies over the a script that runs daily called dailyscript 
file{'/etc/cron.daily/dailyscript': 
source => "puppet:///modules/redhatbase/dailyscript", mode => 754, 
require => File['/etc/cron.daily'], 
} 
#Ensures that log messages are forwarded to loghost and 
/var/log/messages file{'/etc/rsyslog.d/50-default.conf': 
content => "*.* @@loghost:514\n *.* /var/log/messages", require => 
File['/etc/rsyslog.d'], 
} 
#Copies over the a script that installs clamav if not installed 
file{'/etc/cron.daily/claminstall': 
source => "puppet:///modules/redhatbase/claminstall", mode => 754, 
87 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
require => File['/etc/cron.daily'], 
} 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
##Ensure the opt dir is present, copy the BelMonitorLinux script file 
## Copy the belmonitor_install script to the /opt dir 
## Check that the BelMonitor file is present before belmonitor_install 
## executes 
file{'/opt': ensure=>"directory", 
} 
file{'/opt/BelMonitorLinux': 
source => "puppet:///modules/redhatbase/BelMonitorLinux", 
} 
##Make BelMonitorLinux executable exec{'make_executable': 
command=>'/bin/chmod a+x /opt/BelMonitorLinux', require => 
File['/opt/BelMonitorLinux'], 
} 
##Install dependencies exec{'upgrade_dep1': 
command=>'/usr/bin/yum -y upgrade libstdc++', 
} 
exec{'install_dep2': 
command=>'/usr/bin/yum -y install libstdc++.i686', 
} 
exec{'upgrade_dep3': command=>'/usr/bin/yum -y upgrade zlib', 
} 
88 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
exec{'install_dep4': 
command=>'/usr/bin/yum -y install zlib.i686', 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
} 
exec{'install_belmonitor': command=>'/opt/BelMonitorLinux', 
} 
file{'/opt/belmonitor_install': 
source => "puppet:///modules/redhatbase/belmonitor_install", 
} 
} 
/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/redhatbase/files/claminstall 
#!/bin/bash 
# /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/redhatbase/files/claminstall# 
# Script installs clamav if not already installed when run 
if rpm -qa clamav; then 
echo "Clamav is installed" else 
yum install -y epel-release 
yum --enablerepo=epel -y install clamav clamav-update sed -i -e "s/^Example/#Example/" 
/etc/freshclam.conf 
3.7.10.5 Clamav Puppet Module Configuration File 
/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/clamav/manifests/init.pp class clamav{ 
package{'clamav-daemon': ensure=>installed, 
} 
service{'clamav-daemon': ensure=>running, require=>Package['clamav-daemon'], 
} 
89 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
} 
3.7.10.6 Blacklisted Software Removal Script 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/blacklist/manifests/init.pp 
#!/usr/bin/python3 
#-------------------------------readreport.py------------------------# 
#Script will search through the Puppet reports directory and subdirectories, and 
identify blacklisted 
#packages within the yaml files that have been confirmed as removed. It will retrieve 
the software 
#package, host and time of removal and write this to a file called reporttosplunk.csv 
import os 
#List directories in /var/opt/lib/pe-puppet/reports report_list = 
os.listdir('/var/opt/lib/pe-puppet/reports') 
#Make the path to reports a string 
origdir_path = '/var/opt/lib/pe-puppet/reports' 
action_term = "file: 
/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules/blacklist/manifests/init.pp" outfile = 
open('/etc/splunkreport/reporttosplunk.csv', 'a') 
#For loop iterates through report_list (or the reports directory) for sub_dirs in 
report_list: 
hostname = sub_dirs print(hostname) 
#Concatenation creates the full path to subdirectories (it remains a string) 
subdir_path = origdir_path+'/'+sub_dirs 
#Creates the list of files in the variable (the variable in this case would be a sub 
directory) 
#At the end of this block, infile contains a list of line elements in each file 
sub_dirs_list = os.listdir(subdir_path) for files in sub_dirs_list: 
files_path = subdir_path+'/'+files reportfile = open(files_path, "r") infile = 
reportfile.readlines() reportfile.close() 
#line_counter used in keeping track of the index for the line elements in each file 
90 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
line_counter = 0 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
for line in infile: 
if action_term in line: 
if "source" in infile[line_counter + 3]: bad_package = infile[line_counter + 3] 
bad_package = bad_package.replace('\n',',') if "removed" in infile[line_counter + 2]: 
message_var = infile[line_counter + 2] message_var = message_var.replace('\n',',') if 
"time" in infile[line_counter + 1]: 
time_var = infile[line_counter + 1] time_var = time_var.replace('\n',',') 
refined_bad_pkg = bad_package.split('/') bad_pkg = refined_bad_pkg[3] 
bad_pkg = bad_pkg + "," 
print(hostname+","+bad_pkg+message_var+time_var+'\n') 
outfile.write(hostname+','+bad_pkg+message_var+time_var+'\n') line_counter = 
line_counter + 1 
3.7.10.7 Reports Directory Cleanup Script 
/etc/cron.hourly/cleanreportdir.py 
#!/usr/bin/python3 
#-------------------cleanreportdir.py----------------------------# 
#Script removes files with mtimes older than 12 hours to keep the number of files to a 
manageable size 
#Files removed are from the reports subdirectory within Puppet import os 
import time 
#List directories in /var/opt/lib/pe-puppet/reports report_list = 
os.listdir('/var/opt/lib/pe-puppet/reports') 
#Make the path to reports a string 
origdir_path = '/var/opt/lib/pe-puppet/reports' 
#For loop iterates through report_list for sub_dirs in report_list: 
#Concatenation creates the full path to subdirectories (it remains a string) 
subdir_path = origdir_path+'/'+sub_dirs 
91 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
print('Old files are being removed from ',subdir_path) 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
#Creates the list of files in the variable sub_dirs_list sub_dirs_list = 
os.listdir(subdir_path) 
for files in sub_dirs_list: 
files_path = subdir_path+'/'+files mtime = os.path.getmtime(files_path) current_time = 
time.time() 
time_diff = current_time - mtime 
#Removes files with mtimes older than 12 hours if time_diff > 43200: 
print(files_path, " will be deleted") os.remove(files_path) 
3.7.10.8 Reporting Section Script 
#!/bin/bash 
#/etc/cron.hourly/nodereport 
#Time in seconds before declaring an agent that has not checked in absent 
#Change the time to suit your needs 
let "desired_interval=3600" 
for node in $(ls /var/opt/lib/pe-puppet/yaml/node) do 
#Strip out the yaml extension from the node name node=${node%.*} 
#Get time of most recent agent run or check in 
#This time will be reported without formatting node_report_time=$(date -r 
/var/opt/lib/pe-puppet/yaml/facts/$node.yaml) 
#Get epoch time of agent facter yaml file, assign time to variable node_time=$(date 
+%s -r 
/var/opt/lib/pe-puppet/yaml/facts/$node.yaml) 
#Assign current epoch_time to variable current_time=$(date +%s) 
#Subtract node most recent report time from current time and 
#assign to variable node_interval=$((current_time-node_time)) 
#Nodes that have not reported in the given interval are 
#declared absent, otherwise they are declared present if (("$node_interval" > 
"$desired_interval")) 
then 
echo $node "is absent with a last run time of " 
92 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
$node_report_time 
logger $node "is absent. Last run is " $node_report_time 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
else 
echo $node "is present with a last run time of " 
$node_report_time 
logger $node "is present. Last run is " $node_report_time 
fi 
done 
3.8 Snort 
Snort is an open-source intrusion detection system. Snort efficiently analyzes all network traffic and 
matches it with signatures of know bad traffic. An alert is generated if a signature is matched. 
3.8.1 
How It’s Used 
In the FS ITAM build, Snort monitors all traffic traversing the DMZ. 
On the high-level architecture diagram, Snort is in Tier 2. Snort utilizes the Splunk Universal Forwarder 
to send alerts to Splunk Enterprise. 
3.8.2 
Virtual Machine Configuration 
The Snort virtual machine is configured with one network interface card, 2 GB of RAM and one CPU 
core. 
3.8.3 
Network Configuration 
The management network interface card is configured as follows: 
▪ IPv4 Manual 
▪ IPv6 Ignore/Disabled 
▪ IP Address: 172.16.0.40 
▪ Netmask: 255.255.255.0 
▪ Gateway: 172.16.0.11 
▪ DNS Servers: 172.16.1.20, 172.16.1.21 
▪ Search Domains: lab5.nccoe.gov 
93 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3.8.4 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Installing Snort 
Snort is installed on a hardened Ubuntu 14.04 Linux system. Complete installation instructions can be 
found at: https://www.snort.org/. 
This installation utilized the Snort IDS and Barnyard2 to interpret binary Snort alerts into readable text. 
3.8.5 
Installing Snort 
1. For Debian/Ubuntu Linux systems, it is always best to make sure your system is up-to-date by 
performing: 
sudo apt-get update 
sudo apt-get upgrade 
sudo apt-get install snort 
2. You will be asked to input your local networks. For the FS-ITAM lab this is 172.16.0.0/16. 
3. Configure /etc/snort/snort.debian.conf. 
4. Make sure that the correct HOME_NET and INTERFACE are specified in 
/etc/snort/snort.debian.conf. 
DEBIAN_SNORT_HOME_NET="172.16.0.0/16" 
DEBIAN_SNORT_INTERFACE="eth0" 
5. Configure /etc/snort/snort.conf. 
6. Comment out all output configuration lines and add the following: 
output unified2: filename /var/log/snort/snort.log, limit 128, mpls_event_types, 
vlan_event_types 
The preceding line is important for Barnyard2 to work correctly. 
3.8.6 
cd /opt 
Get Updated Community Rules 
wget https://snort.org/downloads/community/community-rules.tar.gz tar xzvf 
community.rules.tar.gz -C /etc/snort/rules 
These community rules contain the sid-msg.map file that Barnyard2 needs. 
mkdir /etc/snort/etc 
cp /etc/snort/rules/community-rules/sid-msg.map /etc/snort/etc 
94 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
Note: In a production environment, it is advisable to install an automatic rule updater such as 
PulledPork. PulledPork requires obtaining an account at Snort.org which results in an Oinkcode. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
3.8.7 
Installing Barnyard2 
1. Install the prerequisites: 
sudo apt-get install build-essential libtool autoconf git nmap 
sudo apt-get install libpcap-dev libmysqld-dev libpcre3-dev libdumbnet-dev 
sudo apt-get install flex bison ldconfig 
2. Barnyard2 requires the <dnet.h> header. Unfortunately, Ubuntu names this header <dumb
net.h> so we must create a symbolic link for Barnyard2 to compile. 
cd /usr/include 
ln -s /usr/include/dumbnet.h dnet.h 
Note: You need to be root to install Barnyard2. 
cd /opt 
Need the Daq libraries from Snort 
wget https://www.snort.org/downloads/snort/daq-2.0.6.tar.gz  
tar xzvf daq-2.0.6.tar.gz 
cd /opt/daq-2.0.6 
./configure make 
make install 
git clone https://github.com/firnsy/barnyard2.git 
cd /opt/barnyard2 
./autogen.sh 
./configure make 
make install 
3. Copy the provided barnyard2.conf file to /usr/local/etc: 
cp /usr/local/etc/barnyard2.conf /usr/local/etc/barnyard2.conf.orig 
cp <barnyard2.conf> /usr/local/etc 
4. Create a link inside /etc/snort to this file: 
ln -s /usr/local/etc/barnyard2 /etc/snort/barnyard.conf 
95 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
5. Copy the provided barnyard2 init script to /etc/init.d and make it executable: 
cp <barnyard2> /etc/init.d chmod 755 /etc/init.d/barnyard2 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
sudo update-rc.d barnyard2 defaults sudo update-rc.d barnyard2 enable 
6. Start up Barnyard2: 
/etc/init.d/barnyard2 start 
Error messages can be found in /var/log/syslog. 
3.8.8 
Testing 
Performing these steps will let you know that Snort and Barnyard2 are working. 
1. Add a local rule. 
2. Edit /etc/snort/rules/local.rules by adding the following line at the bottom that will generate 
alerts for any ICMP/Ping traffic: 
alert icmp any any -> any any (msg: "ICMP Detected";classtype:unknown; sid:1000001; rev:1;) 
Note: the sid must be greater than 1 million. 
3. Restart Snort: 
service snort restart 
4. Verify that Snort is running: 
ps -ef |grep snort 
5. Verify that Barnyard2 is running: 
ps -ef |grep barnyard2 
6. Check the logs in /var/log/snort. The snort.log and alert files should both be growing fast. 
7. You can view the alert file: 
tail -f /var/log/snort/alert 
Note: Do not leave this test running. If you do, it will fill your hard drive. 
8. If everything is good, just comment out the line that you created in local.rules and restart Snort. 
96 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3.8.9 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Installing Splunk Universal Forwarder 
Note: You will need a Splunk account to download the Splunk Universal Forwarder. It is free and can be 
set up at: https://www.splunk.com/page/sign_up. 
1. Download the Splunk Universal Forwarder from: http://www.splunk.com/en_us/download/uni
versal-forwarder.html. 
2. You want the latest version for OS version 2.6+ kernel Linux distributions (64-bit). 
Since this is installing on Ubuntu, select the file that ends in .deb. An example is: 
splunkforwader-6.2.5-272645-linux-2.6-amd64.deb 
Detailed installation instructions can be found at: 
http://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/Splunk/6.2.3/Installation/InstallonLinux. 
3. An abridged version follows: 
dpkg -i <splunk_package_name.deb> 
Example: dpkg -i splunkforwader-6.2.5-272645-linux-2.6-amd64.deb 
4. This will install in /opt/splunkforwarder: 
cd /opt/splunkforwarder/bin 
./splunk start --accept-license 
./splunk enable boot-start 
5. Add forwarder: 
More information about adding a forwarder can be found at: 
http://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/Splunk/6.2.3/Forwarding/Deployanixdfmanually. 
cd /opt/splunkforwarder/bin 
./splunk add forward-server loghost:9997 -auth admin:changme 
3.8.10 Configuring Splunk Universal Forwarder 
Configuring Splunk Universal Forwarder as shown in the FS-ITAM use case requires X.509 Certificates for 
the Splunk Enterprise server/indexer and each Splunk Universal Forwarder. You will also need a copy of 
your certificate authority’s public certificate. 
1. Create a directory to hold your certificates: 
mkdir /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/certs 
97 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
2. Copy your certificates in PEM format to /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/certs: 
cp CAServerCert.pem /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/certs 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
cp bro_worker1.pem /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/certs 
3. Copy Splunk Universal Forwarder configuration files: 
cp <server.conf> /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local 
cp <inputs.conf> /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local 
cp <outputs.conf> /opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local 
4. Modify server.conf so that: 
ServerName=snort is your hostname. 
sslKeysfilePassword = <password for your private key> 
5. Modify outputs.conf so that: 
Server = loghost:9997 is your correct Splunk Enterprise server/indexer and port. 
sslPassword = <password of your certificate private key> 
Note: This will be hashed and not clear text after a restart. 
Inputs.conf should work, but you are free to modify it to include the Bro logs that you are interested in. 
3.8.11 Configurations and Scripts 
/etc/default/barnyard2 
# Config file for /etc/init.d/barnyard2 
#LOG_FILE="snort_unified.log" LOG_FILE="snort.log" 
# You probably don't want to change this, but in case you do SNORTDIR="/var/log/snort" 
INTERFACES="eth0" 
# Probably not this either CONF=/etc/snort/barnyard2.conf 
EXTRA_ARGS=" 
/etc/snort/snort.conf 
#-------------------------------------------------- 
98 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# 
# 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
VRT Rule Packages Snort.conf 
For more information visit us at: 
http://www.snort.org 
Snort Website 
http://vrt-blog.snort.org/ Sourcefire VRT Blog 
Mailing list Contact: 
False Positive reports: 
snort-sigs@lists.sourceforge.net 
fp@sourcefire.com 
Snort bugs: bugs@snort.org 
Compatible with Snort Versions: 
VERSIONS : 2.9.6.0 
Snort build options: 
OPTIONS : --enable-gre --enable-mpls --enable-targetbased --enable-ppm --enable-perfprofiling --enable-zlib --enable-active-response --enable-normalizer --enable-reload --enable-react --enable-flexresp3 
# 
# 
# 
# 
Additional information: 
This configuration file enables active response, to run snort in 
test mode -T you are required to supply an interface -i 
<interface> 
# 
# 
or test mode will fail to fully validate the configuration and 
exit with a FATAL error 
#-------------------------------------------------- 
################################################### 
# This file contains a sample snort configuration. 
# You should take the following steps to create your own custom configuration: 
# 
99 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# 
# 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
1) Set the network variables. 
2) Configure the decoder 
3) Configure the base detection engine 
4) Configure dynamic loaded libraries 
5) Configure preprocessors 
6) Configure output plugins 
7) Customize your rule set 
8) Customize preprocessor and decoder rule set 
9) Customize shared object rule set 
################################################### 
################################################### 
# Step #1: Set the network variables. For more information, see README.variables 
################################################### 
# Setup the network addresses you are protecting 
# 
# Note to Debian users: this value is overriden when starting 
# up the Snort daemon through the init.d script by the 
# value of DEBIAN_SNORT_HOME_NET s defined in the 
# /etc/snort/snort.debian.conf configuration file 
# 
ipvar HOME_NET any 
# Set up the external network addresses. Leave as "any" in most situations 
ipvar EXTERNAL_NET any 
# If HOME_NET is defined as something other than "any", alternative, you can 
# use this definition if you do not want to detect attacks from your internal 
# IP addresses: 
#ipvar EXTERNAL_NET !$HOME_NET 
100 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# List of DNS servers on your network ipvar DNS_SERVERS $HOME_NET 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# List of SMTP servers on your network ipvar SMTP_SERVERS $HOME_NET 
# List of web servers on your network ipvar HTTP_SERVERS $HOME_NET 
# List of sql servers on your network ipvar SQL_SERVERS $HOME_NET 
# List of telnet servers on your network ipvar TELNET_SERVERS $HOME_NET 
# List of ssh servers on your network ipvar SSH_SERVERS $HOME_NET 
# List of ftp servers on your network ipvar FTP_SERVERS $HOME_NET 
# List of sip servers on your network ipvar SIP_SERVERS $HOME_NET 
# List of ports you run web servers on portvar HTTP_PORTS 
[36,80,81,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89,90,311,383,555,591,593,631,801,808,8 
18,901,972,1158,1220,1414,1533,1741,1830,2231,2301,2381,2809,3029,3037 
,3057,3128,3443,3702,4000,4343,4848,5117,5250,6080,6173,6988,7000,7001 
,7144,7145,7510,7770,7777,7779,8000,8008,8014,8028,8080,8081,8082,8085 
,8088,8090,8118,8123,8180,8181,8222,8243,8280,8300,8500,8509,8800,8888 
,8899,9000,9060,9080,9090,9091,9111,9443,9999,10000,11371,12601,15489, 
29991,33300,34412,34443,34444,41080,44449,50000,50002,51423,53331,5525 
2,55555,56712] 
# List of ports you want to look for SHELLCODE on. portvar SHELLCODE_PORTS !80 
# List of ports you might see oracle attacks on portvar ORACLE_PORTS 1024: 
# List of ports you want to look for SSH connections on: portvar SSH_PORTS 22 
# List of ports you run ftp servers on portvar FTP_PORTS [21,2100,3535] 
# List of ports you run SIP servers on portvar SIP_PORTS [5060,5061,5600] 
# List of file data ports for file inspection portvar FILE_DATA_PORTS 
[$HTTP_PORTS,110,143] 
# List of GTP ports for GTP preprocessor portvar GTP_PORTS [2123,2152,3386] 
# other variables, these should not be modified ipvar AIM_SERVERS 
[64.12.24.0/23,64.12.28.0/23,64.12.161.0/24,64.12.163.0/24,64.12.200.0 
/24,205.188.3.0/24,205.188.5.0/24,205.188.7.0/24,205.188.9.0/24,205.18 
8.153.0/24,205.188.179.0/24,205.188.248.0/24] 
101 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# Path to your rules files (this can be a relative path) 
# Note for Windows users: You are advised to make this an absolute path, 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# such as: 
c:\snort\rules 
#var RULE_PATH /etc/snort/rules var RULE_PATH rules 
var SO_RULE_PATH /etc/snort/so_rules 
var PREPROC_RULE_PATH /etc/snort/preproc_rules 
# If you are using reputation preprocessor set these 
# Currently there is a bug with relative paths, they are relative to where snort is 
# not relative to snort.conf like the above variables 
# This is completely inconsistent with how other vars work, BUG 89986 
# Set the absolute path appropriately var WHITE_LIST_PATH /etc/snort/rules var 
BLACK_LIST_PATH /etc/snort/rules 
################################################### 
# Step #2: Configure the decoder. For more information, see README.decode 
################################################### 
# Stop generic decode events: config disable_decode_alerts 
# Stop Alerts on experimental TCP options config disable_tcpopt_experimental_alerts 
# Stop Alerts on obsolete TCP options config disable_tcpopt_obsolete_alerts 
# Stop Alerts on T/TCP alerts config disable_tcpopt_ttcp_alerts 
# Stop Alerts on all other TCPOption type events: config disable_tcpopt_alerts 
# Stop Alerts on invalid ip options config disable_ipopt_alerts 
# Alert if value in length field (IP, TCP, UDP) is greater th elength of the packet 
# config enable_decode_oversized_alerts 
# Same as above, but drop packet if in Inline mode (requires 
enable_decode_oversized_alerts) 
# config enable_decode_oversized_drops 
# Configure IP / TCP checksum mode config checksum_mode: all 
102 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# Configure maximum number of flowbit references. For more information, see 
README.flowbits 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# config flowbits_size: 64 
# Configure ports to ignore 
# config ignore_ports: tcp 21 6667:6671 1356 
# config ignore_ports: udp 1:17 53 
# Configure active response for non inline operation. For more information, see 
REAMDE.active 
# config response: eth0 attempts 2 
# Configure DAQ related options for inline operation. For more information, see 
README.daq 
# 
# config daq: <type> 
# config daq_dir: <dir> 
# config daq_mode: <mode> 
# config daq_var: <var> 
# 
# <type> ::= pcap | afpacket | dump | nfq | ipq | ipfw 
# <mode> ::= read-file | passive | inline 
# <var> ::= arbitrary <name>=<value passed to DAQ 
# <dir> ::= path as to where to look for DAQ module so's 
# Configure specific UID and GID to run snort as after dropping privs. For more 
information see snort -h command line options 
# 
# config set_gid: 
# config set_uid: 
# Configure default snaplen. Snort defaults to MTU of in use interface. For more 
information see README 
103 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# 
# config snaplen: 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# 
# Configure default bpf_file to use for filtering what traffic reaches snort. For more 
information see snort -h command line options (-F) 
# 
# config bpf_file: 
# 
# Configure default log directory for snort to log to. For more information see snort -h command line options (-l) 
# 
# config logdir: 
################################################### 
# Step #3: Configure the base detection engine. For more information, see README.decode 
################################################### 
# Configure PCRE match limitations config pcre_match_limit: 3500 
config pcre_match_limit_recursion: 1500 
# Configure the detection engine See the Snort Manual, Configuring Snort - Includes - 
Config 
config detection: search-method ac-split search-optimize max-pattern-len 20 
# Configure the event queue. 
For more information, see README.event_queue 
config event_queue: max_queue 8 log 5 order_events content_length 
################################################### 
## Configure GTP if it is to be used. 
## For more information, see README.GTP 
#################################################### 
104 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# config enable_gtp 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
################################################### 
# Per packet and rule latency enforcement 
# For more information see README.ppm 
################################################### 
# Per Packet latency configuration 
#config ppm: max-pkt-time 250, \ 
# 
# 
fastpath-expensive-packets, \ 
pkt-log 
# Per Rule latency configuration 
#config ppm: max-rule-time 200, \ 
# 
# 
# 
# 
threshold 3, \ 
suspend-expensive-rules, \ 
suspend-timeout 20, \ 
rule-log alert 
################################################### 
# Configure Perf Profiling for debugging 
# For more information see README.PerfProfiling 
################################################### 
#config profile_rules: print all, sort avg_ticks 
#config profile_preprocs: print all, sort avg_ticks 
################################################### 
# Configure protocol aware flushing 
105 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# For more information see README.stream5 
################################################### 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
config paf_max: 16000 
################################################### 
# Step #4: Configure dynamic loaded libraries. 
# For more information, see Snort Manual, Configuring Snort - Dynamic Modules 
################################################### 
# path to dynamic preprocessor libraries 
dynamicpreprocessor directory /usr/lib/snort_dynamicpreprocessor/ 
# path to base preprocessor engine 
dynamicengine /usr/lib/snort_dynamicengine/libsf_engine.so 
# path to dynamic rules libraries 
dynamicdetection directory /usr/lib/snort_dynamicrules 
################################################### 
# Step #5: Configure preprocessors 
# For more information, see the Snort Manual, Configuring Snort - Preprocessors 
################################################### 
# GTP Control Channle Preprocessor. For more information, see README.GTP 
# preprocessor gtp: ports { 2123 3386 2152 } 
# Inline packet normalization. For more information, see README.normalize 
# Does nothing in IDS mode preprocessor normalize_ip4 
preprocessor normalize_tcp: ips ecn stream preprocessor normalize_icmp4 
preprocessor normalize_ip6 preprocessor normalize_icmp6 
106 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# Target-based IP defragmentation. 
For more inforation, see README.frag3 
preprocessor frag3_global: max_frags 65536 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
preprocessor frag3_engine: policy windows detect_anomalies overlap_limit 10 
min_fragment_length 100 timeout 180 
# Target-Based stateful inspection/stream reassembly. For more inforation, see 
README.stream5 
preprocessor stream5_global: track_tcp yes, \ track_udp yes, \ 
track_icmp no, \ max_tcp 262144, \ 
max_udp 131072, \ 
max_active_responses 2, \ 
min_response_seconds 5 
preprocessor stream5_tcp: policy windows, detect_anomalies, require_3whs 180, \ 
overlap_limit 10, small_segments 3 bytes 150, timeout 180, \ 
ports client 21 22 23 25 42 53 70 79 109 110 111 113 119 135 136 137 
139 143 \ 
161 445 513 514 587 593 691 1433 1521 1741 2100 3306 6070 6665 
6666 6667 6668 6669 \ 
7000 8181 32770 32771 32772 32773 32774 32775 32776 32777 32778 
32779, \ 
ports both 36 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 110 311 383 443 465 
563 555 591 593 631 636 801 808 818 901 972 989 992 993 994 995 1158 
1220 1414 1533 1741 1830 2231 2301 2381 2809 3029 3037 3057 3128 3443 
3702 4000 4343 4848 5117 5250 6080 6173 6988 7907 7000 7001 7144 7145 
7510 7802 7770 7777 7779 \ 
7801 7900 7901 7902 7903 7904 7905 7906 7908 7909 7910 7911 7912 
7913 7914 7915 7916 \ 
7917 7918 7919 7920 8000 8008 8014 8028 8080 8081 8082 8085 8088 
8090 8118 8123 8180 8181 8222 8243 8280 8300 8500 8509 8800 8888 8899 
9000 9060 9080 9090 9091 9111 9443 9999 10000 11371 12601 15489 29991 
33300 34412 34443 34444 41080 44449 50000 50002 51423 53331 55252 55555 
107 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
56712 
preprocessor stream5_udp: timeout 180 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# performance statistics. For more information, see the Snort Manual, Configuring 
Snort - Preprocessors - Performance Monitor 
# preprocessor perfmonitor: time 300 file /var/snort/snort.stats pktcnt 10000 
# HTTP normalization and anomaly detection. 
README.http_inspect 
For more information, see 
preprocessor http_inspect: global iis_unicode_map unicode.map 1252 compress_depth 
65535 decompress_depth 65535 max_gzip_mem 104857600 
preprocessor http_inspect_server: server default \ 
http_methods { GET POST PUT SEARCH MKCOL COPY MOVE LOCK UNLOCK NOTIFY POLL BCOPY 
BDELETE BMOVE LINK UNLINK OPTIONS HEAD DELETE TRACE TRACK CONNECT SOURCE SUBSCRIBE 
UNSUBSCRIBE PROPFIND PROPPATCH BPROPFIND BPROPPATCH RPC_CONNECT PROXY_SUCCESS 
BITS_POST CCM_POST SMS_POST RPC_IN_DATA RPC_OUT_DATA RPC_ECHO_DATA } \ 
chunk_length 500000 \ 
server_flow_depth 0 \ 
client_flow_depth 0 \ 
post_depth 65495 \ 
oversize_dir_length 500 \ 
max_header_length 750 \ 
max_headers 100 \ 
max_spaces 200 \ 
small_chunk_length { 10 5 } \ 
ports { 36 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 311 383 555 591 593 631 
801 808 818 901 972 1158 1220 1414 1741 1830 2231 2301 2381 2809 3029 
3037 3057 3128 3443 3702 4000 4343 4848 5117 5250 6080 6173 6988 7000 
7001 7144 7145 7510 7770 7777 7779 8000 8008 8014 8028 8080 8081 8082 
8085 8088 8090 8118 8123 8180 8181 8222 8243 8280 8300 8500 8509 8800 
8888 8899 9000 9060 9080 9090 9091 9111 9443 9999 10000 11371 12601 
15489 29991 33300 34412 34443 34444 41080 44449 50000 50002 51423 53331 
55252 55555 56712 } \ 
108 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
non_rfc_char { 0x00 0x01 0x02 0x03 0x04 0x05 0x06 0x07 } \ enable_cookie \ 
extended_response_inspection \ inspect_gzip \ 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
normalize_utf \ unlimited_decompress \ normalize_javascript \ apache_whitespace no \ 
ascii no \ 
bare_byte no \ directory no \ double_decode no \ iis_backslash no \ iis_delimiter no \ 
iis_unicode no \ multi_slash no \ utf_8 no \ u_encode yes \ webroot no 
# ONC-RPC normalization and anomaly detection. For more information, see the Snort 
Manual, Configuring Snort - Preprocessors - RPC Decode 
preprocessor rpc_decode: 111 32770 32771 32772 32773 32774 32775 32776 
32777 32778 32779 no_alert_multiple_requests no_alert_large_fragments 
no_alert_incomplete 
# Back Orifice detection. preprocessor bo 
# FTP / Telnet normalization and anomaly detection. For more information, see 
README.ftptelnet 
preprocessor ftp_telnet: global inspection_type stateful encrypted_traffic no 
check_encrypted 
preprocessor ftp_telnet_protocol: telnet \ ayt_attack_thresh 20 \ 
normalize ports { 23 } \ detect_anomalies 
preprocessor ftp_telnet_protocol: ftp server default \ def_max_param_len 100 \ 
ports { 21 2100 3535 } \ telnet_cmds yes \ ignore_telnet_erase_cmds yes \ 
ftp_cmds { ABOR ACCT ADAT ALLO APPE AUTH CCC CDUP } \ ftp_cmds { CEL CLNT CMD CONF CWD 
DELE ENC EPRT } \ ftp_cmds { EPSV ESTA ESTP FEAT HELP LANG LIST LPRT } \ ftp_cmds { 
LPSV MACB MAIL MDTM MIC MKD MLSD MLST } \ ftp_cmds { MODE NLST NOOP OPTS PASS PASV 
PBSZ PORT } \ ftp_cmds { PROT PWD QUIT REIN REST RETR RMD RNFR } \ ftp_cmds { RNTO 
SDUP SITE SIZE SMNT STAT STOR STOU } \ ftp_cmds { STRU SYST TEST TYPE USER XCUP XCRC 
XCWD } \ ftp_cmds { XMAS XMD5 XMKD XPWD XRCP XRMD XRSQ XSEM } \ 
ftp_cmds { XSEN XSHA1 XSHA256 } \ 
alt_max_param_len 0 { ABOR CCC CDUP ESTA FEAT LPSV NOOP PASV PWD QUIT REIN STOU SYST 
XCUP XPWD } \ 
alt_max_param_len 200 { ALLO APPE CMD HELP NLST RETR RNFR STOR STOU XMKD } \ 
alt_max_param_len 256 { CWD RNTO } \ alt_max_param_len 400 { PORT } \ 
alt_max_param_len 512 { SIZE } \ 
chk_str_fmt { ACCT ADAT ALLO APPE AUTH CEL CLNT CMD } \ chk_str_fmt { CONF CWD DELE 
ENC EPRT EPSV ESTP HELP } \ chk_str_fmt { LANG LIST LPRT MACB MAIL MDTM MIC MKD } \ 
chk_str_fmt { MLSD MLST MODE NLST OPTS PASS PBSZ PORT } \ chk_str_fmt { PROT REST RETR 
109 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
RMD RNFR RNTO SDUP SITE } \ chk_str_fmt { SIZE SMNT STAT STOR STRU TEST TYPE USER } \ 
chk_str_fmt { XCRC XCWD XMAS XMD5 XMKD XRCP XRMD XRSQ } \ 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
chk_str_fmt { XSEM XSEN XSHA1 XSHA256 } \ cmd_validity ALLO < int [ char R int ] > \ 
cmd_validity EPSV < [ { char 12 | char A char L char L } ] > \ cmd_validity MACB < 
string > \ 
cmd_validity MDTM < [ date nnnnnnnnnnnnnn[.n[n[n]]] ] string > \ cmd_validity MODE < 
char ASBCZ > \ 
cmd_validity PORT < host_port > \ cmd_validity PROT < char CSEP > \ cmd_validity STRU 
< char FRPO [ string ] > \ 
cmd_validity TYPE < { char AE [ char NTC ] | char I | char L [ number ] } > 
preprocessor ftp_telnet_protocol: ftp client default \ max_resp_len 256 \ 
bounce yes \ ignore_telnet_erase_cmds yes \ telnet_cmds yes 
# SMTP normalization and anomaly detection. 
For more information, see README.SMTP 
preprocessor smtp: ports { 25 465 587 691 } \ inspection_type stateful \ 
b64_decode_depth 0 \ 
qp_decode_depth 0 \ 
bitenc_decode_depth 0 \ 
uu_decode_depth 0 \ log_mailfrom \ log_rcptto \ log_filename \ log_email_hdrs \ 
normalize cmds \ 
normalize_cmds { ATRN AUTH BDAT CHUNKING DATA DEBUG EHLO EMAL ESAM ESND ESOM ETRN EVFY 
} \ 
normalize_cmds { EXPN HELO HELP IDENT MAIL NOOP ONEX QUEU QUIT RCPT RSET SAML SEND 
SOML } \ 
normalize_cmds { STARTTLS TICK TIME TURN TURNME VERB VRFY X-ADAT X-DRCP X-ERCP X
EXCH50 } \ 
normalize_cmds { X-EXPS X-LINK2STATE XADR XAUTH XCIR XEXCH50 XGEN XLICENSE XQUE XSTA 
XTRN XUSR } \ 
max_command_line_len 512 \ 
max_header_line_len 1000 \ 
max_response_line_len 512 \ alt_max_command_line_len 260 { MAIL } \ 
alt_max_command_line_len 300 { RCPT } \ 
alt_max_command_line_len 500 { HELP HELO ETRN EHLO } \ 
alt_max_command_line_len 255 { EXPN VRFY ATRN SIZE BDAT DEBUG EMAL ESAM ESND ESOM EVFY 
IDENT NOOP RSET } \ 
110 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
alt_max_command_line_len 246 { SEND SAML SOML AUTH TURN ETRN DATA RSET QUIT ONEX QUEU 
STARTTLS TICK TIME TURNME VERB X-EXPS X-LINK2STATE XADR XAUTH XCIR XEXCH50 XGEN 
XLICENSE XQUE XSTA XTRN XUSR } \ 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
valid_cmds { ATRN AUTH BDAT CHUNKING DATA DEBUG EHLO EMAL ESAM ESND ESOM ETRN EVFY } \ 
valid_cmds { EXPN HELO HELP IDENT MAIL NOOP ONEX QUEU QUIT RCPT RSET SAML SEND SOML } 
\ 
valid_cmds { STARTTLS TICK TIME TURN TURNME VERB VRFY X-ADAT X-DRCP X-ERCP X-EXCH50 } 
\ 
valid_cmds { X-EXPS X-LINK2STATE XADR XAUTH XCIR XEXCH50 XGEN XLICENSE XQUE XSTA XTRN 
XUSR } \ 
xlink2state { enabled } 
# Portscan detection. 
For more information, see README.sfportscan 
# preprocessor sfportscan: proto { all } memcap { 10000000 } sense_level { low } 
# ARP spoof detection. 
For more information, see the Snort Manual - Configuring 
Snort - Preprocessors - ARP Spoof Preprocessor 
# preprocessor arpspoof 
# preprocessor arpspoof_detect_host: 192.168.40.1 f0:0f:00:f0:0f:00 
# SSH anomaly detection. For more information, see README.ssh preprocessor ssh: 
server_ports { 22 } \ 
autodetect \ max_client_bytes 19600 \ 
max_encrypted_packets 20 \ 
max_server_version_len 100 \ enable_respoverflow enable_ssh1crc32 \ enable_srvoverflow 
enable_protomismatch 
# SMB / DCE-RPC normalization and anomaly detection. For more information, see 
README.dcerpc2 
preprocessor dcerpc2: memcap 102400, events [co ] preprocessor dcerpc2_server: 
default, policy WinXP, \ 
detect [smb [139,445], tcp 135, udp 135, rpc-over-http-server 593], 
\ 
autodetect [tcp 1025:, udp 1025:, rpc-over-http-server 1025:], \ smb_max_chain 3, 
smb_invalid_shares ["C$", "D$", "ADMIN$"] 
# DNS anomaly detection. For more information, see README.dns preprocessor dns: 
ports { 53 } enable_rdata_overflow 
111 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# SSL anomaly detection and traffic bypass. 
For more information, see README.ssl 
preprocessor ssl: ports { 443 465 563 636 989 992 993 994 995 7801 7802 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
7900 7901 7902 7903 7904 7905 7906 7907 7908 7909 7910 7911 7912 7913 
7914 7915 7916 7917 7918 7919 7920 }, trustservers, noinspect_encrypted 
# SDF sensitive data preprocessor. 
For more information see README.sensitive_data 
preprocessor sensitive_data: alert_threshold 25 
# SIP Session Initiation Protocol preprocessor. For more information see README.sip 
preprocessor sip: max_sessions 40000, \ ports { 5060 5061 5600 }, \ 
methods { invite \ 
cancel \ ack \ 
bye \ register \ options \ refer \ 
subscribe \ update \ join \ 
info \ message \ notify \ benotify \ do \ 
qauth \ sprack \ publish \ service \ unsubscribe \ prack }, \ 
max_uri_len 512, \ 
max_call_id_len 80, \ 
max_requestName_len 20, \ 
max_from_len 256, \ 
max_to_len 256, \ 
max_via_len 1024, \ 
max_contact_len 512, \ 
max_content_len 2048 
# IMAP preprocessor. For more information see README.imap preprocessor imap: \ 
ports { 143 } \ b64_decode_depth 0 \ 
qp_decode_depth 0 \ 
bitenc_decode_depth 0 \ 
uu_decode_depth 0 
112 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# POP preprocessor. For more information see README.pop preprocessor pop: \ 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
ports { 110 } \ b64_decode_depth 0 \ 
qp_decode_depth 0 \ 
bitenc_decode_depth 0 \ 
uu_decode_depth 0 
# Modbus preprocessor. For more information see README.modbus preprocessor modbus: 
ports { 502 } 
# DNP3 preprocessor. For more information see README.dnp3 preprocessor dnp3: ports { 
20000 } \ 
memcap 262144 \ 
check_crc 
# 
# Note to Debian users: this is disabled since it is an experimental 
# preprocessor. If you want to use it you have to create the rules files 
# referenced below in the /etc/snort/rules directory 
# 
# Reputation preprocessor. For more information see README.reputation 
#preprocessor reputation: \ 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
memcap 500, \ 
priority whitelist, \ 
nested_ip inner, \ 
whitelist $WHITE_LIST_PATH/white_list.rules, \ 
blacklist $BLACK_LIST_PATH/black_list.rules 
################################################### 
# Step #6: Configure output plugins 
# For more information, see Snort Manual, Configuring Snort - Output Modules 
################################################### 
113 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# unified2 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# Recommended for most installs 
# output unified2: filename merged.log, limit 128, nostamp, mpls_event_types, 
vlan_event_types 
#output unified2: filename snort.log, limit 128, nostamp, mpls_event_types, 
vlan_event_types 
output unified2: filename /var/log/snort/snort.log, limit 128, mpls_event_types, 
vlan_event_types 
# Additional configuration for specific types of installs 
# output alert_unified2: filename snort.alert, limit 128, nostamp 
# output log_unified2: filename snort.log, limit 128, nostamp 
# syslog 
# output alert_syslog: LOG_AUTH LOG_ALERT 
# pcap 
# output log_tcpdump: tcpdump.log 
# metadata reference data. do not modify these lines include classification.config 
include reference.config 
################################################### 
# Step #7: Customize your rule set 
# For more information, see Snort Manual, Writing Snort Rules 
# 
# NOTE: All categories are enabled in this conf file 
################################################### 
# Note to Debian users: The rules preinstalled in the system 
# can be *very* out of date. For more information please read 
114 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# the /usr/share/doc/snort-rules-default/README.Debian file 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# 
# If you install the official VRT Sourcefire rules please review this 
# configuration file and re-enable (remove the comment in the first line) those 
# rules files that are available in your system (in the 
/etc/snort/rules 
# directory) 
# site specific rules 
include $RULE_PATH/local.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/app-detect.rules include $RULE_PATH/attack-responses.rules include 
$RULE_PATH/backdoor.rules 
include $RULE_PATH/bad-traffic.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/blacklist.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/botnet-cnc.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/browser-chrome.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/browser-firefox.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/browser-ie.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/browser-other.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/browser-plugins.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/browser-webkit.rules include $RULE_PATH/chat.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/content-replace.rules include $RULE_PATH/ddos.rules 
include $RULE_PATH/dns.rules include $RULE_PATH/dos.rules 
include $RULE_PATH/experimental.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/exploit-kit.rules include $RULE_PATH/exploit.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/file-executable.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/file-flash.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/file-identify.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/file-image.rules 
115 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
#include $RULE_PATH/file-java.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/file-multimedia.rules 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
#include $RULE_PATH/file-office.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/file-other.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/file-pdf.rules include $RULE_PATH/finger.rules include 
$RULE_PATH/ftp.rules include $RULE_PATH/icmp-info.rules include $RULE_PATH/icmp.rules 
include $RULE_PATH/imap.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/indicator-compromise.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/indicator-obfuscation.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/indicator-scan.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/indicator-shellcode.rules include $RULE_PATH/info.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/malware-backdoor.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/malware-cnc.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/malware-other.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/malware-tools.rules include $RULE_PATH/misc.rules 
include $RULE_PATH/multimedia.rules include $RULE_PATH/mysql.rules include 
$RULE_PATH/netbios.rules include $RULE_PATH/nntp.rules include $RULE_PATH/oracle.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/os-linux.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/os-mobile.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/os-other.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/os-solaris.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/os-windows.rules include $RULE_PATH/other-ids.rules include 
$RULE_PATH/p2p.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/phishing-spam.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/policy-multimedia.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/policy-other.rules include $RULE_PATH/policy.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/policy-social.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/policy-spam.rules include  $RULE_PATH/pop2.rules include 
$RULE_PATH/pop3.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/protocol-dns.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/protocol-finger.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/protocol-ftp.rules 
116 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
#include $RULE_PATH/protocol-icmp.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/protocol-imap.rules 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
#include $RULE_PATH/protocol-nntp.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/protocol-pop.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/protocol-rpc.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/protocol-scada.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/protocol-services.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/protocol-snmp.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/protocol-telnet.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/protocol-tftp.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/protocol-voip.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/pua-adware.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/pua-other.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/pua-p2p.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/pua-toolbars.rules include $RULE_PATH/rpc.rules 
include $RULE_PATH/rservices.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/scada.rules include $RULE_PATH/scan.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/server-apache.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/server-iis.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/server-mail.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/server-mssql.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/server-mysql.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/server-oracle.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/server-other.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/server-samba.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/server-webapp.rules 
# 
# Note: These rules are disable by default as they are 
# too coarse grained. Enabling them causes a large 
# performance impact 
117 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
#include $RULE_PATH/shellcode.rules include $RULE_PATH/smtp.rules include 
$RULE_PATH/snmp.rules 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
#include $RULE_PATH/specific-threats.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/spyware-put.rules include $RULE_PATH/sql.rules 
include $RULE_PATH/telnet.rules include $RULE_PATH/tftp.rules include 
$RULE_PATH/virus.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/voip.rules 
#include $RULE_PATH/web-activex.rules include $RULE_PATH/web-attacks.rules 
include $RULE_PATH/web-cgi.rules include $RULE_PATH/web-client.rules include 
$RULE_PATH/web-coldfusion.rules include $RULE_PATH/web-frontpage.rules include 
$RULE_PATH/web-iis.rules include $RULE_PATH/web-misc.rules include $RULE_PATH/web
php.rules include $RULE_PATH/x11.rules 
include $RULE_PATH/community-sql-injection.rules include $RULE_PATH/community-web
client.rules include $RULE_PATH/community-web-dos.rules include $RULE_PATH/community
web-iis.rules include $RULE_PATH/community-web-misc.rules include 
$RULE_PATH/community-web-php.rules include $RULE_PATH/community-sql-injection.rules 
include $RULE_PATH/community-web-client.rules include $RULE_PATH/community-web
dos.rules include $RULE_PATH/community-web-iis.rules include $RULE_PATH/community-web
misc.rules include $RULE_PATH/community-web-php.rules 
################################################### 
# Step #8: Customize your preprocessor and decoder alerts 
# For more information, see README.decoder_preproc_rules 
################################################### 
# decoder and preprocessor event rules 
# include $PREPROC_RULE_PATH/preprocessor.rules 
# include $PREPROC_RULE_PATH/decoder.rules 
# include $PREPROC_RULE_PATH/sensitive-data.rules 
################################################### 
# Step #9: Customize your Shared Object Snort Rules 
# For more information, see 
http://vrt-blog.snort.org/2009/01/using-vrt-certified-shared-object-ru les.html 
################################################### 
118 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# dynamic library rules 
# include $SO_RULE_PATH/bad-traffic.rules 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# include $SO_RULE_PATH/chat.rules 
# include $SO_RULE_PATH/dos.rules 
# include $SO_RULE_PATH/exploit.rules 
# include $SO_RULE_PATH/icmp.rules 
# include $SO_RULE_PATH/imap.rules 
# include $SO_RULE_PATH/misc.rules 
# include $SO_RULE_PATH/multimedia.rules 
# include $SO_RULE_PATH/netbios.rules 
# include $SO_RULE_PATH/nntp.rules 
# include $SO_RULE_PATH/p2p.rules 
# include $SO_RULE_PATH/smtp.rules 
# include $SO_RULE_PATH/snmp.rules 
# include $SO_RULE_PATH/specific-threats.rules 
# include $SO_RULE_PATH/web-activex.rules 
# include $SO_RULE_PATH/web-client.rules 
# include $SO_RULE_PATH/web-iis.rules 
# include $SO_RULE_PATH/web-misc.rules 
# Event thresholding or suppression commands. See threshold.conf include 
threshold.conf 
/etc/snort/snort.debian.conf 
# snort.debian.config (Debian Snort configuration file) 
# 
# This file was generated by the post-installation script of the snort 
# package using values from the debconf database. 
# 
# It is used for options that are changed by Debian to leave 
119 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# the original configuration files untouched. 
# 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# This file is automatically updated on upgrades of the snort package 
# *only* if it has not been modified since the last upgrade of that package. 
# 
# If you have edited this file but would like it to be automatically updated 
# again, run the following command as root: 
# 
dpkg-reconfigure snort 
DEBIAN_SNORT_STARTUP="boot" DEBIAN_SNORT_HOME_NET="172.16.0.0/16" 
DEBIAN_SNORT_OPTIONS="" DEBIAN_SNORT_INTERFACE="eth0" DEBIAN_SNORT_SEND_STATS="true" 
DEBIAN_SNORT_STATS_RCPT="root" DEBIAN_SNORT_STATS_THRESHOLD="1" 
/usr/local/etc/barnyard2.conf 
Also linked from /etc/snort/barnyard.conf. 
# 
# 
# 
# 
Barnyard2 example configuration file 
# This file contains a sample barnyard2 configuration. 
# You can take the following steps to create your own custom configuration: 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
1) Configure the variable declarations 
2) Setup the input plugins 
3) Setup the output plugins 
# Step 1: configure the variable declarations 
# 
120 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# in order to keep from having a commandline that uses every letter in the 
# alphabet most configuration options are set here. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# use UTC for timestamps 
# 
#config utc 
# set the appropriate paths to the file(s) your Snort process is using. 
# 
config reference_file: 
/etc/snort/etc/reference.config config classification_file: 
/etc/snort/etc/classification.config config gen_file: /etc/snort/gen-msg.map 
config sid_file: 
/etc/snort/etc/sid-msg.map 
# Configure signature suppression at the spooler level see doc/README.sig_suppress 
# 
# 
#config sig_suppress: 1:10 
# Set the event cache size to defined max value before recycling of event occur. 
# 
# 
#config event_cache_size: 4096 
# define dedicated references similar to that of snort. 
# 
#config reference: mybugs http://www.mybugs.com/?s= 
# define explicit classifications similar to that of snort. 
# 
#config classification: shortname, short description, priority 
# set the directory for any output logging 
121 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# 
config logdir: /var/log/barnyard2 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# to ensure that any plugins requiring some level of uniqueness in their output 
# the alert_with_interface_name, interface and hostname directives are provided. 
# An example of usage would be to configure them to the values of the associated 
# snort process whose unified files you are reading. 
# 
# Example: 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
For a snort process as follows: 
snort -i eth0 -c /etc/snort.conf 
Typical options would be: 
config hostname: 
thor 
config interface: eth0 
# 
# 
config alert_with_interface_name 
config hostname: 
snort config interface: 
eth0 
# enable printing of the interface name when alerting. 
# 
#config alert_with_interface_name 
# at times snort will alert on a packet within a stream and dump that stream to 
# the unified output. barnyard2 can generate output on each packet of that 
# stream or the first packet only. 
# 
#config alert_on_each_packet_in_stream 
# enable daemon mode 
# 
122 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
config daemon 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# make barnyard2 process chroot to directory after initialisation. 
# 
#config chroot: /var/spool/barnyard2 
# specifiy the group or GID for barnyard2 to run as after initialisation. 
# 
#config set_gid: 999 
# specifiy the user or UID for barnyard2 to run as after initialisation. 
# 
#config set_uid: 999 
# specify the directory for the barnyard2 PID file. 
# 
#config pidpath: /var/run/by2.pid 
# enable decoding of the data link (or second level headers). 
# 
#config decode_data_link 
# dump the application data 
# 
#config dump_payload 
# dump the application data as chars only 
# 
#config dump_chars_only 
123 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# enable verbose dumping of payload information in log style output plugins. 
# 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
#config dump_payload_verbose 
# enable obfuscation of logged IP addresses. 
# 
#config obfuscate 
# enable the year being shown in timestamps 
# 
config show_year 
# set the umask for all files created by the barnyard2 process (eg. log files). 
# 
#config umask: 066 
# enable verbose logging 
# 
#config verbose 
# quiet down some of the output 
# 
#config quiet 
# define the full waldo filepath. 
# 
config waldo_file: /tmp/waldo 
# specificy the maximum length of the MPLS label chain 
# 
124 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
#config max_mpls_labelchain_len: 64 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# specify the protocol (ie ipv4, ipv6, ethernet) that is encapsulated by MPLS. 
# 
#config mpls_payload_type: ipv4 
# set the reference network or homenet which is predominantly used by the 
# log_ascii plugin. 
# 
#config reference_net: 192.168.0.0/24 
# 
# CONTINOUS MODE 
# 
# set the archive directory for use with continous mode 
# 
#config archivedir: /tmp 
# when in operating in continous mode, only process new records and ignore any 
# existing unified files 
# 
#config process_new_records_only 
# 
# Step 2: setup the input plugins 
# 
# this is not hard, only unified2 is supported ;) 
input unified2 
125 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# Step 3: setup the output plugins# 
# alert_cef 
# ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
# 
# Purpose: 
# 
This output module provides the abilty to output alert information to a 
# remote network host as well as the local host using the open standard 
# Common Event Format (CEF). 
# 
# Arguments: host=hostname[:port], severity facility 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
arguments should be comma delimited. 
host - specify a remote hostname or IP with optional port number 
this is only specific to WIN32 (and is not yet fully supported) 
severity 
facility 
# Examples: 
# - as defined in RFC 3164 (eg. LOG_WARN, LOG_INFO) - as defined in RFC 3164 (eg. LOG_AUTH, LOG_LOCAL0) 
output alert_cef 
# 
# 
# 
# 
output alert_cef: host=192.168.10.1 
output alert_cef: host=sysserver.com:1001 
output alert_cef: LOG_AUTH LOG_INFO 
# alert_bro 
# ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
126 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# 
# Purpose: Send alerts to a Bro-IDS instance. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# 
# Arguments: hostname:port 
# 
# Examples: 
# 
output alert_bro: 127.0.0.1:47757 
# alert_fast 
# ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
# Purpose: Converts data to an approximation of Snort's "fast alert" mode. 
# 
# Arguments: file <file>, stdout 
# 
# 
# 
# 
arguments should be comma delimited. 
file - specifiy alert file 
stdout - no alert file, just print to screen 
# Examples: 
# 
# 
# 
output alert_fast 
output alert_fast: stdout 
#output alert_fast: stdout 
output alert_fast: /var/log/snort/alert 
# prelude: log to the Prelude Hybrid IDS system 
# ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
# 
# Purpose: 
127 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# 
# 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
This output module provides logging to the Prelude Hybrid IDS system 
# Arguments: profile=snort-profile 
# 
# 
snort-profile - name of the Prelude profile to use (default is snort). 
# Snort priority to IDMEF severity mappings: 
# high < medium < low < info 
# 
# These are the default mapped from classification.config: 
# info = 4 
# low = 3 
# medium = 2 
# high = anything below medium 
# 
# Examples: 
# 
# 
# 
output alert_prelude 
output alert_prelude: profile=snort-profile-name 
# alert_syslog 
# ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
# 
# Purpose: 
# 
syslog 
# 
# 
# 
# 
This output module provides the abilty to output alert information to local 
severity 
facility 
# Examples: - as defined in RFC 3164 (eg. LOG_WARN, LOG_INFO) - as defined in RFC 3164 (eg. LOG_AUTH, LOG_LOCAL0) 
128 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# 
# 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# 
output alert_syslog 
output alert_syslog: LOG_AUTH LOG_INFO 
output alert_syslog: LOG_AUTH LOG_INFO 
# syslog_full 
#------------------------------- 
# Available as both a log and alert output plugin. Used to output data via TCP/UDP or 
LOCAL ie(syslog()) 
# Arguments: 
# 
# 
# 
sensor_name $sensor_name - unique sensor name 
server $server - server the device will report to 
local - if defined, ignore all remote information and use syslog() to send 
message. 
# 
# 
# 
protocol $protocol - protocol device will report over (tcp/udp) 
port $port - destination port device will report to (default: 514) 
delimiters $delimiters  - define a character that will delimit message 
sections ex: "|", will use | as message section delimiters. (default: |) 
#     
separators $separators - define field separator included in each message ex: 
" " , will use space as field separator. (default: [:space:]) 
# 
operation_mode $operaion_mode - default | complete : default mode is 
compatible with default snort syslog message, complete prints more information such as 
the raw packet (hexed) 
# 
log_priority $log_priority - used by local option for syslog priority call. (man 
syslog(3) for supported options) (default: LOG_INFO) 
# 
log_facility $log_facility - used by local option for syslog facility call. (man 
syslog(3) for supported options) (default: LOG_USER) 
# 
payload_encoding - (default: hex) 
support hex/ascii/base64 for 
log_syslog_full using operation_mode complete only. 
# Usage Examples: 
# output alert_syslog_full: sensor_name snortIds1-eth2, server xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx, 
protocol udp, port 514, operation_mode default 
# output alert_syslog_full: sensor_name snortIds1-eth2, server xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx, 
protocol udp, port 514, operation_mode complete 
129 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# output log_syslog_full: sensor_name snortIds1-eth2, server xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx, protocol 
udp, port 514, operation_mode default 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# output log_syslog_full: sensor_name snortIds1-eth2, server xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx, protocol 
udp, port 514, operation_mode complete 
# output alert_syslog_full: sensor_name snortIds1-eth2, server xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx, 
protocol udp, port 514 
# output log_syslog_full: sensor_name snortIds1-eth2, server xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx, protocol 
udp, port 514 
# output alert_syslog_full: sensor_name snortIds1-eth2, local 
# output log_syslog_full: sensor_name snortIds1-eth2, local, log_priority 
LOG_CRIT,log_facility LOG_CRON 
# log_ascii 
# ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
# 
# Purpose: This output module provides the default packet logging funtionality 
# 
# Arguments: None. 
# 
# Examples: 
# 
# 
output log_ascii 
output log_ascii 
# log_tcpdump 
# ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
# 
# Purpose 
# 
# 
This output module logs packets in binary tcpdump format 
130 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# Arguments: 
# 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# 
The only argument is the output file name. 
# Examples: 
# 
# 
output log_tcpdump: tcpdump.log 
output log_tcpdump: /var/log/snort/tcpdump.log 
# sguil 
# ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
# 
# Purpose: This output module provides logging ability for the sguil interface 
# See doc/README.sguil 
# 
# Arguments: agent_port <port>, sensor_name <name> 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
arguments should be comma delimited. 
agent_port - explicitly set the sguil agent listening port 
(default: 7736) 
sensor_name - explicitly set the sensor name 
(default: machine hostname) 
# Examples: 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
output sguil 
output sguil: agent_port=7000 
output sguil: sensor_name=argyle 
output sguil: agent_port=7000, sensor_name=argyle 
# database: log to a variety of databases 
# 
131 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
# 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
# Purpose: This output module provides logging ability to a variety of databases 
# See doc/README.database for additional information. 
# 
# Examples: 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
output database: log, mysql, user=root password=test dbname=db host=localhost 
output database: alert, postgresql, user=snort dbname=snort 
output database: log, odbc, user=snort dbname=snort 
output database: log, mssql, dbname=snort user=snort password=test 
output database: log, oracle, dbname=snort user=snort password=test 
#output database: log, mysql, user=root password=1Password! dbname=snortdb 
# alert_fwsam: allow blocking of IP's through remote services 
# ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
# output alert_fwsam: <SnortSam Station>:<port>/<key> 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
<FW Mgmt Station>: IP address or host name of the host running SnortSam. 
<port>: 
Port the remote SnortSam service listens on (default 898). 
<key>: Key used for authentication (encryption really) 
of the communication to the remote service. 
# Examples: 
# 
# output alert_fwsam: snortsambox/idspassword 
# output alert_fwsam: fw1.domain.tld:898/mykey 
# output alert_fwsam: 192.168.0.1/borderfw 
# 
192.168.1.254/wanfw 
132 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
/opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local/server.conf 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
[sslConfig] 
sslKeysfilePassword = $1$A0zU/599eO4g 
[lmpool:auto_generated_pool_forwarder] description = auto_generated_pool_forwarder 
quota = MAX 
slaves = * 
stack_id = forwarder 
[lmpool:auto_generated_pool_free] description = auto_generated_pool_free quota = MAX 
slaves = * stack_id = free 
[general] 
pass4SymmKey = $1$VACAo9o7M7wg serverName = snort 
/opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local/inputs.conf 
Note: The sourcetype=snort_alert_full is important if you are using the Splunk TA_Snort app. 
[default] host=snort 
sourcetype=snort_alert_full index=snort 
[monitor:///var/log/snort/alert] sourcetype=snort_alert_full 
/opt/splunkforwarder/etc/system/local/outputs.conf 
[tcpout] 
defaultGroup = splunkssl 
[tcpout:splunkssl] server = loghost:9997 compressed = true 
sslVerifyServerCert = false 
sslRootCAPath = $SPLUNK_HOME/etc/certs/CAServerCert.pem sslCertPath = 
$SPLUNK_HOME/etc/certs/snort.lab5.nccoe.gov.pem sslPassword = $1$cw== 
133 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3.9 Tyco Security Products 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Tyco Security Products are used to integrate personnel access management into the FS ITAM build. The 
CCURE 9000 security and event management system allows integration with a variety of intrusion 
devices, allowing admins to monitor and perform intrusion detection within facilities to stop incidents of 
malicious activity or violation of policy. For the ITAM build, the focal point of the CCURE 9000 product is 
personnel and visitor management. The iSTAR Edge Door Controller provides features to secure any 
door, including clustering, door monitoring, and anti-passback. 
3.9.1 
Installing Tyco Security Products 
Tyco Security Products hardware is received with pre-installed software. Hardware components 
received for this build include the following: 
▪ host laptop 
▪ iSTAR Edge Door Controller 
▪ two badge readers 
▪ three badges 
▪ American Dynamics Video Edge Network Video Recorder (NVR) 
▪ one camera 
▪ NETGEAR ProSAFE switch 
▪ Ethernet cables 
Directions for connecting components will be included in the packaging on the iSTAR Edge Installation 
Reference disc. The host laptop will have the iSTAR Configuration Utility, CCURE 9000, License Manager, 
KeyCodeGenerator, and Victor Management Software installed and pre-configured. The iSTAR 
Configuration Utility can be used to confirm IP addresses. 
3.9.2 
Configurations 
All components included with Tyco Security Products will be pre-configured. Configuration manuals are 
documented at the Tyco Security Products website as well as on the iSTAR Edge Installation Reference 
disc. In addition, the security product suite will be accompanied by a list of all static IP addresses to 
confirm or correct any configurations. Static IP addresses for the ITAM build are as follows: 
▪ laptop (host): 192.168.1.167 
▪ NVR: 192.168.1.178 
▪ camera: 192.168.1.177 
▪ iSTAR: 192.168.1.169 
134 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
The three badges received are configured for the ITAM build. Two badges contain access rights, with a 
clearance, while one badge does not. Two door readers are configured as door controllers for one door. 
One reader is configured as the IN reader while the second is configured as the OUT reader. Badges 
must have a clearance to be admitted into the door. 
Configurations for badges, doors and readers can be viewed and managed using CCURE 9000 software 
shown in Figure 3-1. 
Figure 3-1 CCURE 9000 Overview 
The host machine should then be connected to the ITAM network to integrate with the ITAM build. To 
prepare the host machine for integration with ITAM, SQL Server Management Studio must be installed. 
For the ITAM build, a query to the journal table is called by Splunk Enterprise to retrieve information, 
including the Cardholder Name, Door Name, Journal Log Message Type, Message Text and Message 
Date/Time. The information produced from CCURE is shown in Figure 3-2. 
Figure 3-2 CCURE 9000 Messages 
135 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
The query ran for Splunk Enterprise to retrieve the information from the journal is as follows: 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
SELECT MessageType, MessageUTC, REPLACE(PrimaryObjectName,',',' ') AS 
PrimaryObjectName, XmlMessage 
FROM JournalLog WHERE MessageType='CardAdmitted' OR MessageType='CardRejected' 
3.10 Windows Server Update Services (WSUS) 
WSUS is integrated into Windows Server 2012 as a server role. WSUS enables IT administrators to 
deploy the latest Microsoft product updates to computers that are running the Windows operating 
system. Using WSUS, an administrator can fully manage the distribution of updates that are released 
through Microsoft Update to computers in their network. 
3.10.1 How It’s Used 
The ITAM system is using WSUS for its reporting features. WSUS reports on the volume and status of 
software updates from Microsoft Update. ITAM uses this information to provide insight to 
administrators for analysis of which Windows machines in the network are not in compliance with the 
latest vulnerability patches and software updates. 
3.10.2 Virtual Machine Configuration 
The WSUS virtual machine is configured with one network interface card, 8 GB of RAM, one CPU core 
and 100 GB of hard drive space. The 100 GB of hard drive space is very important for this machine. 
3.10.3 Network Configuration 
The management network interface card is configured as follows: 
▪ IPv4 Manual 
▪ IPv6 Disabled 
▪ IP Address: 172.16.0.45 
▪ Netmask: 255.255.255.0 
▪ Gateway: 172.16.0.11 
▪ DNS Servers: 172.16.1.20, 172.16.1.21 
▪ Search Domains: lab5.nccoe.gov 
136 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3.10.4 Installing WSUS 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
WSUS is installed through the add roles and features wizard in Server Manager. Documentation is 
provided by Microsoft at: https://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/windowsserver/bb332157.aspx. WSUS 
should NOT be a member of your domain. 
3.10.5 Configurations 
You configure WSUS using the WSUS Server Configuration Wizard. When the wizard prompts you, set 
these options as follows: 
▪ Update Source and Proxy Server – Synchronize form Microsoft Update 
▪ Products and Classifications – Microsoft SQL Server 2012, Microsoft SQL Server 2014, SQL 
Server 2008 R2, SQL Server 2008, SQL Server 2012 Product Updates for Setup, SQL server 
Feature Pack, Windows 7, Windows Server 2012 R2 and later drivers, Windows Server 2012 R2 
▪ Update Files and Languages – Store update files locally on this server < Download update files 
to this server only when updates are approved, Download updates only in English 
▪ Synchronization Schedule – Automatically > 1 per day 
▪ Automatic Approvals – Default 
▪ Computers – Use the Update Services console 
▪ Reporting Rollup – N/A 
▪ E-mail Notifications – N/A 
▪ Personalization – N/A 
3.10.6 Configure Active Directory Server to Require WSUS 
Clients are configured to get their Windows updates and patches through Group Policy on the Active 
Directory server. 
Full documentation can be found at: https://technet.microsoft.com/en
us/library/Cc720539%28v=WS.10%29.aspx. 
1. On the Active Directory Server: 
Administrative Tools > Group Policy Management 
2. Under your domain, create a new group policy object by right-clicking and selecting Create a GPO 
in this domain, and link it here. 
3. Then right-click the newly created GPO in the Group Policy Objects area of the Group Policy Man
agement window and select Edit. 
137 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
4. In the Group Policy Management Editor expand Computer Configuration, expand Administra
tive Templates, expand Windows Components, and then click Windows Update. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
5. In the details pane, select Specify intranet Microsoft update service location. 
6. Click ENABLED and enter the URL of the WSUS server and statistics server (they are the same for 
this build): http://wsus.lab5.nccoe.gov:8530. 
3.10.7 Create WSUS Statistics for Splunk Enterprise 
When WSUS is running and downloading updates (you can check this by running a report), you can work 
with assemblies using Windows PowerShell to connect to the WSUS server. With this connection, 
PowerShell script can be written to extract information from WSUS. The script creates two .CSV files 
with WSUS information that are forwarded to Splunk Enterprise. The script to accomplish this task is as 
follows: 
1. Filename: WSUSReport.ps1 
$wsus 
$wsusserver = 'wsus' 
2. Load required assemblies: 
[reflection.assembly]::LoadWithPartialName("Microsoft.UpdateServices.A 
dministration")| Out-Null 
$wsus = [Microsoft.UpdateServices.Administration.AdminProxy]::getUpdateServer( 
'wsus',$False,8530) 
3. Create update scope object: 
$updatescope = New-Object Microsoft.UpdateServices.Administration.UpdateScope 
$updatescope.IncludedInstallationStates = 
[Microsoft.UpdateServices.Administration.UpdateInstallationStates]::No 
tInstalled 
$updatescope.FromArrivalDate = [datetime]"12/13/2011" 
$computerscope = New-Object 
Microsoft.UpdateServices.Administration.ComputerTargetScope 
$wsus.GetSummariesPerComputerTarget($updatescope,$computerscope) | Select 
@{L='ComputerTarget';E={($wsus.GetComputerTarget([guid]$_.ComputerTarg 
etId)).FullDomainName}}, 
@{L='NeededCount';E={($_.DownloadedCount+$_.NotInstalledCount)}},Downl 
oadedCount,NotInstalledCount,InstalledCount,FailedCount | Export-Csv 
c:\ReportCount.csv 
138 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
$wsus.GetUpdateApprovals($updatescope) | Select 
@{L='ComputerTargetGroup';E={$_.GetComputerTargetGroup().Name}}, 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
@{L='UpdateTitle';E={($wsus.GetUpdate([guid]$_.UpdateId.UpdateId.Guid) 
).Title}}, GoLiveTime,AdministratorName,Deadline | Export-Csv c:\UpdateStat.csv 
This script creates two .CSV files and places them on the C drive: ReportCount.csv and UpdateStat.csv. 
These two files contain the fields ComputerTarget, NeededCount, DownloadedCount, 
NotInstalledCount, InstalledCount, FailedCount; and ComputerTargetGroup, UpdateTitle, GoLiveTime, 
AdministratorName and Deadline, respectively. 
When the script is running error free, a task is scheduled for the script to run daily for updates to the 
data. To create a scheduled task, complete the following steps: 
1. Open Task Scheduler and select Create Task. 
2. Name the task and give it a description. Select Run whether user is logged on or not. Select Run 
with highest privileges. Configure for: Windows Server 2012 R2. 
3. Select the Triggers tab and select New. Create a trigger to run every day at the desired time. 
4. Select the Actions tab and select New. Under Action, select Start a Program. In the Pro
gram/script box, enter c:\Windows\System32\WindowsPowershell\v1.0\powershell.exe or 
browse for the PowerShell executable. 
5. In the arguments box insert -ExecutionPolicy Bypass <locationofscript>. Select OK to save the 
task. 
6. Use the defaults for the remaining settings. The scheduled task should look similar to the task 
highlighted in the following figure. 
139 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
3.10.8 Installing Splunk Universal Forwarder 
Note: You will need a Splunk account to download the Splunk Universal Forwarder. It is free and can be 
set up at: https://www.splunk.com/page/sign_up. 
1. Download the Splunk Universal Forwarder from: http://www.splunk.com/en_us/download/uni
versal-forwarder.html. 
2. You want the latest version for OS version Windows (64-bit). Since this is installing on Win
dows, select the file that ends in .msi. An example is: 
splunkforwader-6.2.5-272645-x64-release.msi 
Detailed installation instructions can be found at: 
http://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/Splunk/6.2.3/Forwarding/DeployaWindowsdfmanually
#Install_the_universal_forwarder. 
3.10.9 Configuring Splunk Universal Forwarder 
Configuring Splunk Universal Forwarder as shown in the FS-ITAM use case requires X.509 Certificates for 
the Splunk Enterprise server/indexer and each Splunk Universal Forwarder. You will also need a copy of 
your certificate authority’s public certificate. 
140 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
If you entered your certificates during install time, they will be located at: 
C:\Program Files\SplunkUniversalForwarder\etc\auth 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
If not, you will need to manually copy your certificates here. 
1. Copy Splunk Universal Forwarder configuration files: 
copy <server.conf> C:\Program Files\SplunkUniversalForwarder\etc\system\local 
copy <inputs.conf> C:\Program Files\SplunkUniversalForwarder\etc\system\local 
copy <outputs.conf> C:\Program Files\SplunkUniversalForwarder\etc\system\local 
2. Modify server.conf so that: 
ServerName=WSUS is your hostname. 
sslKeysfilePassword = <password for your private key> 
3. Modify outputs.conf so that: 
Server = loghost:9997 is your correct Splunk Enterprise server/indexer and port. 
sslPassword = <password of your certificate private key> 
Note: This will be hashed and not clear text after a restart. 
Inputs.conf should work, but you are free to modify it to include the Windows logs that you are 
interested in. 
3.10.10 Configurations and Scripts 
C:\Program Files\SplunkUniversalForwarder\etc\system\local server.conf 
[sslConfig] 
sslKeysfilePassword = $1$sznWu23zCGHY 
[general] 
pass4SymmKey = $1$5HWC5yi1QzPY serverName = WSUS 
[lmpool:auto_generated_pool_forwarder] description = auto_generated_pool_forwarder 
quota = MAX 
slaves = * 
stack_id = forwarder 
141 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
[lmpool:auto_generated_pool_free] description = auto_generated_pool_free quota = MAX 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
slaves = * stack_id = free 
C:\Program Files\SplunkUniversalForwarder\etc\system\local\inputs.conf 
[default] host = WSUS 
sourcetype = wsus 
index = wsus 
[script://$SPLUNK_HOME\bin\scripts\splunk-wmi.path] disabled = 0 
[monitor:///C:\ReportCount.csv] sourcetype=wsus_reportcount 
crcSalt is needed because this file doesn't change much and is small crcSalt = 
<SOURCE> 
ignoreOlderThan = 2d disabled = 0 
[monitor:///C:\UpdateStat.csv ] sourcetype=wsus_updatestat ignoreOlderThan = 2d 
disabled = 0 
C:\Program Files\SplunkUniversalForwarder\etc\system\local\outputs.conf 
[tcpout] 
defaultGroup = default-autolb-group 
[tcpout:default-autolb-group] server = loghost:9997 
[tcpout-server://loghost:9997] sslCertPath = C:\wsus.lab5.nccoe.gov.pem sslPassword = 
$1$sznWu23zCGHY 
sslRootCAPath = C:\Users\DoD_Admin\Downloads\CAServerCert.pem 
4 Tier 3 
4.1 Active Directory Server 
The Active Directory server in the ITAM build uses an NCCoE base 2012 R2 x86_64 DoD STIG image. The 
installation of the Windows Active Directory server was performed using installation media provided by 
DISA. This image was chosen because it is standardized, hardened, and fully documented. 
142 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
4.1.1 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Software Configurations 
4.1.1.1 Windows 2012 Active Directory Server 
Active Directory provides centralized management, authentication, security, and information storage for 
end devices and users in a networked environment. 
4.1.2 
How It’s Used 
The Active Directory service is used in the ITAM build to provide authentication, user management and 
security within a mixed environment with Windows and Linux endpoints. 
4.1.3 
Installation 
1. Go to Server Manager and click Add Roles and Features Wizard. 
143 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
2. Click Next and select Role-based or feature-based installation. Then, click Next. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
3. Ensure that the appropriate server name is selected. Then, click Next. 
4. Click the checkbox next to Active Directory Domain Services. Then click Next to advance to the 
next screen. Then, click Add Features. 
5. Use the features selected by default. Then, click Next. 
6. In the Active Directory Domain Services screen, click Next. 
144 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
7. On the Confirm installations selections screen, click Install. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
8. When you see the message that the installation was successful, click close. 
9. Return to the Server Manager and click on the yellow warning message. 
10. On the Post-deployment Configuration box, click Promote this server to a domain controller. 
11. Choose Add a new forest, specify the root domain name and click Next. 
12. Use the default settings in the Domain Controller Options page. Ensure that DNS server is se
lected. Enter the Directory Services Restore Mode password and click Next. 
13. Choose a NetBIOS domain Name and click Next. 
145 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
14. Accept the default locations for AD DS, DS Database, log files and SYSVOL. 
15. In the Review Options screen, click Next. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
16. Allow the system to complete the prerequisites check and click Install. 
17. When the installation completes, reboot the system. 
4.2 AssetCentral 
AssetCentral is an IT infrastructure management system that stores and displays information related to 
physical assets including location, make, model, and serial number. AssetCentral can help run an entire 
data center by monitoring weight, utilization, available space, heat and power distribution. AssetCentral 
is installed on a CentOS7 system. 
4.2.1 
How It’s Used 
In the FS ITAM build AssetCentral is used to provide physical asset location. AssetCentral provides the 
building, room and rack of an asset. 
4.2.2 
Virtual Machine Configuration 
The virtual machine is configured with 1 network interface cards, 4 GB of RAM and 1 CPU cores. 
4.2.3 
Network Configuration 
The management network interface card is configured as such: 
▪ IPv4 Manual 
▪ IPv6 Ignore/Disabled 
▪ IP Address: 172.16.1.50 
▪ Netmask: 255.255.255.0 
▪ Gateway: 172.16.1.11 
▪ DNS Servers: 172.16.1.20, 172.16.1.21 
▪ Search Domains: lab5.nccoe.gov 
4.2.4 
Installing AssetCentral 
AssetCentral is installed on a hardened CentOS7 Linux system. AssetCentral requires PHP, Web Server 
(Apache) and MySQL database to be installed. 
146 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
Table 4-1 Recommended Versions for AssetCentral – Tier 3 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Vendor 
Product 
Version 
RedHat 
Enterprise Linux Server 
Apache 
Release 6.4 (Santiago) (x86_64) 
Web Server 
mysql 
httpd-2.2.15-26.el6.x86_64 
Server 
php  
5.1.6.6 
5.3.3 or higher 
4.2.5 
Installing MySQL (MariaDB) 
# yum -y install mariadb-server mariadb 
#systemctl start mariadb.service 
#systemctl enable mariadb.service 
# mysql_secure_installation 
1. Answer the questions with the default answers while performing the mysql_secure_installation. 
2. Create a database – assetcentral. 
3. Create a user – assetcentral. 
4. Grant all privileges to assetcentral user. 
4.2.6 
Installing Apache 
# yum -y install httpd 
#systemctl start httpd.service 
#systemctl enable httpd.service 
#firewall-cmd --permanent --zone=public --add-service=http 
#firewall-cmd --permanent --zone=public --add-service=https 
#firewall-cmd -reload 
4.2.6.1 HTTP Configuration 
1. Go to HTTPD root; normally (/etc/httpd). 
2. Under the modules directory, make sure libphp5.so exists. 
3. Change documentroot (webroot) as per environment in httpd.conf. 
147 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
4.2.7 
Installing PHP5 
#yum -y install php 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
#systemctl restart httpd.service 
#yum search php 
#yum -y install php-mysql 
#yum -y install php-gd php-ldap php-odbc php-pear php-xml php-xmlrpc php-mbstring php
snmp php-soap curl curl-devel 
1. Restart Apache: 
#systemctl restart httpd.service 
4.2.8 
Post Installation Tasks 
1. Copy AssetCentral files and folders from previous install to the new webroot. 
2. Under the location (../assetcentral/application/config) make necessary changes as per environ
ment. 
4.2.8.1 Sample 
<?php defined('ASSET_CENTRAL')ordie(''); define('AC_URL_SUBDIR','/acprod'); 
define('AC_URL_SCRIPT','/index.php'); define('AC_URL_PARAM','go'); 
define('AC_URL_PREFIX',AC_URL_SUBDIR . AC_URL_SCRIPT.'?' 
. AC_URL_PARAM . '='); define('AC_ERROR_REPORTING',E_ERROR); 
//no slash at the end of this url define('URL_SITE','http://10.1.xx.xxx'); 
define('OS','NIX'); // *NIX WIN BSD MAC 
//default database (read) define('DB_TYPE_READ','MYSQL'); 
define('DB_HOST_READ','127.0.0.1'); 
//usually leave this blank for MYSQL define('DB_PORT_READ',''); 
define('DB_USER_READ','assetcentral'); define('DB_PASS_READ','xxxxx'); 
define('DB_DATA_READ','asset_prod'); define('DB_PREFIX_READ',''); 
4.3 Email 
Email is the email server for the FS-ITAM build. 
4.3.1 
How It’s Used 
In the FS ITAM build, Email provides all users with email. 
148 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
4.3.2 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Virtual Machine Configuration 
The Email virtual machine is configured with one network interface card, 4 GB of RAM and one CPU 
core. 
4.3.3 
Network Configuration 
The management network interface card is configured as follows: 
▪ IPv4 Manual 
▪ IPv6 Ignore/Disabled 
▪ IP Address: 172.16.1.50 
▪ Netmask: 255.255.255.0 
▪ Gateway: 172.16.1.11 
▪ DNS Servers: 172.16.1.20, 172.16.1.21 
▪ Search Domains: lab5.nccoe.gov 
4.3.4 
Installing Email 
Email is installed on a hardened Ubuntu 14.04 Linux system. This email system is using the Postfix email 
program. Complete installation instructions can be found at: 
https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Postfix#Installation. 
For Debian/Ubuntu Linux systems: It is always best to make sure your system is up-to-date by 
performing: 
sudo apt-get update sudo apt-get upgrade 
sudo apt-get install postfix 
4.3.5 
Configure Email 
From a terminal prompt: 
sudo dpkg-reconfigure postfix 
General type of mail configuration: Internet Site 
NONE doesn’t appear to be requested in current config. 
System mail name: mail1.lab5.nccoe.gov 
Root and postmaster mail recipient: <admin_user_name> 
149 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Other destinations for mail: email1, email1.lab5.nccoe.gov, localhost.lab5.nccoe.gov, 
localhost.localdomain, localhost, lab5.nccoe.gov 
Force synchronous updates on mail queue? No 
Local networks: 172.16.0.0/16 
Yes doesn't appear to be requested in current config. 
Mailbox size limit (bytes): 0 
Local address extension character: + 
Internet protocols to use: all 
Ensure that /etc/postfix/main.cf looks like the version below in the Configuration Files section 
(Section 4.3.8). Especially take note that the inet_interfaces setting. inet_interfaces = loopback-only will 
NOT allow mail from other machines. 
4.3.6 
User Accounts 
1. Create an account for each user that needs email: 
adduser <username> 
2. Answer the questions. 
4.3.7 
DNS Settings 
For mail to work correctly, an MX record must be set up on the DNS server. 
The FS-ITAM build is using a Microsoft Server 2012R2 as its DNS server. 
1. First set up a DNS A-Record for the email server, which looks like: 
Host: email1 
FQDN: email1.lab5.nccoe.gov IP address: 172.16.1.50 
2. Check next to Update associates pointer record. 
3. Next create an MX record that looks like: 
Host or child domain: (same as parent folder) 
FQDN: lab5.nccoe.gov 
FQDN of mail server: email1.lab5.nccoe.gov 
Mail server priority: 10 
150 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
4.3.8 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Configuration Files 
/etc/postfix/main.cf 
# See /usr/share/postfix/main.cf.dist for a commented, more complete version 
# Debian specific: Specifying a file name will cause the first 
# line of that file to be used as the name. The Debian default 
# is /etc/mailname. 
#myorigin = /etc/mailname 
smtpd_banner = $myhostname ESMTP $mail_name (Ubuntu) biff = no 
# appending .domain is the MUA's job. append_dot_mydomain = no 
# Uncomment the next line to generate "delayed mail" warnings 
#delay_warning_time = 4h readme_directory = no 
# TLS parameters 
smtpd_tls_cert_file = /etc/ssl/certs/smtpd.crt smtpd_tls_key_file = 
/etc/ssl/private/smtpd.key smtpd_use_tls=yes 
smtpd_tls_session_cache_database = btree:${data_directory}/smtpd_scache 
smtp_tls_session_cache_database = btree:${data_directory}/smtp_scache 
# See /usr/share/doc/postfix/TLS_README.gz in the postfix-doc package for 
# information on enabling SSL in the smtp client. 
smtpd_relay_restrictions = permit_mynetworks permit_sasl_authenticated 
defer_unauth_destination 
myhostname = mail1.lab5.nccoe.gov alias_maps = hash:/etc/aliases alias_database = 
hash:/etc/aliases 
mydestination = email1, email1.lab5.nccoe.gov, localhost.lab5.nccoe.gov, 
localhost.localdomain, localhost, lab5.nccoe.gov 
relayhost = 
151 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
mynetworks = 172.16.0.0/16 127.0.0.0/8 [::ffff:127.0.0.0]/104 [::1]/128 
mailbox_size_limit = 0 recipient_delimiter = + 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
#inet_interfaces = loopback-only inet_interfaces = all default_transport = smtp 
relay_transport = smtp 
myorigin = /etc/mailname inet_protocols = all home_mailbox = Maildir/ mailbox_command 
= smtpd_sasl_local_domain = smtpd_sasl_auth_enable = yes 
smtpd_sasl_security_options = noanonymous broken_sasl_auth_clients = yes 
smtpd_recipient_restrictions = 
permit_sasl_authenticated,permit_mynetworks,reject_unauth_destination 
smtp_tls_security_level = may smtpd_tls_security_level = may smtpd_tls_auth_only = no 
smtp_tls_note_starttls_offer = yes smtpd_tls_CAfile = /etc/ssl/certs/cacert.pem 
smtpd_tls_loglevel = 1 smtpd_tls_received_header = yes smtpd_tls_session_cache_timeout 
= 3600s tls_random_source = dev:/dev/urandom 
4.4 Openswan (VPN) 
Openswan is an open-source IPsec VPN. Openswan runs on Linux and supports IKEv1, IKEv2, X.509 
Digital Certificates and NAT Traversal. 
4.4.1 
How It’s Used 
In the FS ITAM build, Openswan is used to form a secure VPN to the mainframe computer owned by 
Vanguard Integrity Professionals. 
4.4.2 
Virtual Machine Configuration 
The Openswan virtual machine is configured with two network interface cards, 8 GB of RAM and one 
CPU core. 
4.4.3 
Network Configuration 
The management network interface card is configured as follows: 
▪ IPv4 Manual 
▪ IPv6 Ignore/Disabled 
▪ IP Address: 172.16.0.67 (internal interface) 
▪ IP Address: 10.33.5.16 (external interface for the VPN) Netmask: 255.255.255.0 
▪ Gateway: 10.33.5.1 
▪ DNS Servers: 8.8.8.8, 172.16.1.20, 172.16.1.21 
▪ Search Domains: lab5.nccoe.gov 
152 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
4.4.4 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Installing Openswan 
Openswan is installed on a hardened Ubuntu 14.04 Linux system. Complete installation instructions can 
be found at https://www.openswan.org/. 
4.4.5 
Installing Openswan 
1. For Debian/Ubuntu Linux systems: It is always best to make sure your system is up-to-date by 
performing: 
sudo apt-get update sudo apt-get upgrade 
sudo apt-get install openswan xl2tpd ppp lsof 
2. Copy the provided configuration files into /etc: 
cp <ipsec.conf> /etc 
cp <ipsec.secrets> /etc 
3. Edit /etc/ipsec.secrets and replace MYSECRET with your pre-shared key. 
4. Restart Openswan: 
service ipsec restart 
5. Verify by running: 
service ipsec status 
6. Bring up the IPsec tunnel: 
ipsec auto -up nccoe-vanguard 
7. Verify by running: 
ipsec auto -verbose -status 
If you see (ISAKMP SA established) then that is good. 
A little script was created to keep the connection up - connect_vanguard.sh. 
8. Copy connect_vanguard.sh somewhere typical like /usr/local/bin: 
cp <connect_vanguard.sh> /usr/local/bin chmod 755 
/usr/local/bin/connect_vanguard.sh 
9. Have it run every hour by linking it into cron.daily: 
ln - s /usr/local/bin/connect_vanguard.sh 
/etc/cron.daily/connect_vanguard 
153 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
4.4.6 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Configurations and Scripts 
/etc/ipsec.conf 
# /etc/ipsec.conf - Openswan IPsec configuration file 
# This file: /usr/share/doc/openswan/ipsec.conf-sample 
# 
# Manual: 
ipsec.conf.5 
# conforms to second version of ipsec.conf specification 
# basic configuration config setup 
# Do not set debug options to debug configuration issues! 
# plutodebug / klipsdebug = "all", "none" or a combation from below: 
# "raw crypt parsing emitting control klips pfkey natt x509 dpd private" 
# eg: 
# plutodebug="control parsing" 
# Again: only enable plutodebug or klipsdebug when asked by a developer 
# 
# enable to get logs per-peer 
# plutoopts="--perpeerlog" 
# 
# Enable core dumps (might require system changes, like ulimit -C) 
# This is required for abrtd to work properly 
# Note: incorrect SElinux policies might prevent pluto writing the core 
dumpdir=/var/run/pluto/ 
# 
# NAT-TRAVERSAL support, see README.NAT-Traversal nat_traversal=yes 
# exclude networks used on server side by adding %v4:!a.b.c.0/24 
# It seems that T-Mobile in the US and Rogers/Fido in Canada are 
154 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
# using 25/8 as "private" address space on their 3G network. 
# This range has not been announced via BGP (at least upto 2010-12-21) 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
virtual_private=%v4:10.0.0.0/8,%v4:192.168.0.0/16,%v4:172.16.0.0/12,%v 
4:25.0.0.0/8,%v6:fd00::/8,%v6:fe80::/10 
# OE is now off by default. Uncomment and change to on, to enable. oe=off 
# which IPsec stack to use. auto will try netkey, then klips then mast 
#protostack=auto protostack=netkey 
# Use this to log to a file, or disable logging on embedded systems (like openwrt) 
#plutostderrlog=/dev/null 
#plutodebug=all plutostderrlog=/var/log/pluto.log nat_traversal=yes 
oe=off 
#myid=172.16.0.66 
# Add connections here conn nccoe-vanguard 
type=tunnel forceencaps=yes authby=secret 
ike=3des-sha1;modp1024 #don't actually need to specify this keyexchange=ike 
ikelifetime=22800s phase2=esp 
phase2alg=aes256-sha1;modp1024 salifetime=3600s 
pfs=yes #vanguard has pfs on auto=start 
keyingtries=3 
#rekey=no 
left=%defaultroute leftnexthop=%defaultroute 
leftsubnet=172.16.0.0/24 #NCCoE ITAM lab internal subnet 
# either one of these seems to work 
#leftid=10.33.5.16 #behind firewall ip address leftid=136.160.255.42 #public ip 
address 
#leftsourceip=136.160.255.42 leftsourceip=10.33.5.16 
155 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
right=174.47.13.99 #IOS outside address 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
rightid=174.47.13.99 
#IKE ID send by IOS 
#rightsubnet is the internal subnet on the distant end rightsubnet=172.17.212.0/24 
#network behind IOS rightnexthop=%defaultroute 
/etc/ipsec.secrets 
# This file holds shared secrets or RSA private keys for inter-Pluto 
# authentication. See ipsec_pluto(8) manpage, and HTML documentation. 
# RSA private key for this host, authenticating it to any other host 
# which knows the public part. Suitable public keys, for ipsec.conf, DNS, 
# or configuration of other implementations, can be extracted conveniently 
# with "ipsec showhostkey". 
# this file is managed with debconf and will contain the automatically created RSA 
keys 
# The %any %any line is just for testing 
# Replace MYSECRET with your pre-shared key 
include /var/lib/openswan/ipsec.secrets.inc 172.16.0.67 174.47.13.99 : PSK "MYSECRET" 
10.33.5.16 174.47.13.99 : PSK "MYSECRET" 
#%any %any : PSK "MYSECRET" 
/usr/local/bin/connect_vanguard.sh 
#!/bin/sh 
#start IPsec tunnel 
ipsec auto --up nccoe-vanguard 
156 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
#status 
#ipsec auto --verbose --status 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
4.5 Ubuntu Apt-Cacher 
Ubuntu Apt-Cacher is a central repository for update and patch management used by all Ubuntu 
systems on the network. 
4.5.1 
How It’s Used 
In the FS ITAM build, Ubuntu Apt-Cacher provides all Ubuntu systems with patches and updates. 
4.5.2 
Virtual Machine Configuration 
The Ubuntu Apt-Cacher virtual machine is configured with one network interface cards, 4 GB of RAM 
and one CPU core. 
4.5.3 
Network Configuration 
The management network interface card is configured as follows: 
▪ IPv4 Manual 
▪ IPv6 Ignore/Disabled 
▪ IP Address: 172.16.0.67 
▪ Netmask: 255.255.255.0 
▪ Gateway: 172.16.0.11 
▪ DNS Servers: 172.16.1.20, 172.16.1.21 
▪ Search Domains: lab5.nccoe.gov 
4.5.4 
Installing Ubuntu Apt-Cacher 
Ubuntu Apt-Cacher is installed on a hardened Ubuntu 14.04 Linux system. Complete installation 
instructions can be found at: https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Apt-Cacher-Server. 
1. For Debian/Ubuntu Linux systems: It is always best to make sure your system is up-to-date by 
performing: 
sudo apt-get update sudo apt-get upgrade 
sudo apt-get install apt-cacher apache2 
2. Enable apt-cacher by editing /etc/default/apt-cacher and change autostart to 1. 
157 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
3. Restart Apache: 
sudo /etc/init.d/apache2 restart 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
4. Verify that things are working by pointing your Web browser to http://<apt-cacher>:3142. 
5. Edit /etc/apt-cacher/apt-cacher.conf and uncomment the following line: allowed_hosts = * 
6. Configure as a proxy to APT: 
sudo nano /etc/apt/apt.conf.d/01proxy 
7. Inside your new file, add a line that says: 
Acquire::http::Proxy "http://<IP address or hostname of the apt-cacher 
server>:3142"; 
8. Restart apt-cacher: 
sudo /etc/init.d/apt-cacher restart 
4.5.5 
Client Configuration 
1. Client configuration is the same as setting up the server as a proxy to APT: 
sudo nano /etc/apt/apt.conf.d/01proxy 
2. Inside your new file, add a line that says: 
Acquire::http::Proxy "http://172.16.0.77:3142"; 
4.6 Windows 2012 Certificate Authority 
The Windows 2012 Certificate Authority server in the ITAM build uses an NCCoE base 2012 R2 x86_64 
DoD STIG image. The installation of the Windows 2012 Certificate Authority server was performed using 
installation media provided by DISA. This image was chosen because it is standardized, hardened, and 
fully documented. 
4.6.1 
Software Configurations 
Windows 2012 Certificate Authority (CA) server was designed to issue certificates to endpoints that 
need to be accessed by users such that communication to such devices are deemed secure. It is used in 
building a PKI system. 
4.6.2 
How It’s Used 
The ITAM solution uses the Windows 2012 CA server to issue certificates to endpoints that have services 
that need to be accessed securely such as HTTPS enabled devices. The pfSense routers utilized these 
158 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
certificates allowing for secure communication and configuration. The certificates are also utilized by 
Splunk Enterprise and the Splunk Universal Forwarder. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
4.6.2.1 INSTALL ACTIVE DIRECTORY CERTIFICATE SERVICES (AD CS) 
1. Go to Server Manager and click Add Roles and Features Wizard. 
2. Click Next. Select Role-based or feature-based installation. Click Next. 
3. Select your server on the next screen and click Next. 
4. Select the Active Directory Certificate Services and Add Features when prompted. 
5. Click Next when you see .NET 4.5 framework and other default selections. 
6. Click Next on informational screens. 
7. On the Role Services for AD CS, select all checkboxes and click Next. 
8. When you are prompted to install the IIS web service, click Install. 
9. Click Close when the installation completes. 
4.6.2.2 CONFIGURE AD CS SERVICES PART 1 
1. Go back to Server Manager and click on the warning icon. 
2. Click on Configure Active Directory Certificate Services. Click Next. 
3. On the Role Services to configure screen, select Certification Authority, Certification Authority 
Web Enrollment. 
4. Choose Enterprise CA. On the following screen click Next. 
5. Choose Root CA and click Next. 
6. Choose Create a new private key and click Next. 
7. Leave the defaults on the Specify the cryptographic options screen and click Next. 
8. Specify the CA common name and click Next. 
9. Use the default selection: Specify a validity period at the default of 5 years for the certificates 
generated by this CA. 
10. Leave the database locations at default and click Next. 
11. Click Configure to initiate configuration of the selected roles. 
159 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
12. Click Close when the configurations succeed. 
13. Click No if a Configure additional role services pop up is presented. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
4.6.2.3 CONFIGURE AD CS PART 2 
1. Go back to Server Manager and click on the yellow warning sign. 
2. Click on Configure AD CS on the destination server. 
3. Specify a user with credentials to configure role services. The user must be part of the Enter
prise Admins group. 
4. Select the other checkboxes and click Next. 
5. Select a domain account with the specified permissions. 
6. Accept the default RA name and click Next. 
7. Accept the default Cryptographic options cryptographic service providers and key lengths and 
click Next. 
8. Select the default CA name as the name to be used for Certificate Enrollment Services. 
9. Specify the same service account for to be used for Certificate Enrollment Web Service. 
10. Choose the available Server Certificate and click Next. Click Configure; then, click Close. 
4.6.2.4 CONFIGURE A CERTIFICATE AND PUBLISH TO ACTIVE DIRECTORY 
1. Open the Certification Authority tool from Server Manager. 
2. Right-click Certificate Templates. 
3. Click Manage. 
4. Right-click Any template and click Duplicate. 
5. Give it a distinct name/Template Display name. 
6. Click the Subject Name tab and select Common Name from the subject name format dropdown 
list. 
7. Click Apply, click OK and then close the dialog box. 
8. Go back to the Certification Authority tool and right-click Certificate Templates. 
9. Select the certificate you just created and click on Properties. 
160 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
10. On the General tab, click on Publish to Active Directory. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
11. Click on the Security tab, select Domain Computers and check the Read, Enroll and Autoenroll 
boxes. 
12. Click Apply and then OK to close the dialog box. 
4.6.2.5 CONFIGURE GROUP POLICY TO AUTO-ENROLL DOMAIN COMPUTERS 
1. Log on to the domain controller. 
2. Go to Group Policy Management Tool via Server Manager. 
3. Expand the forest, then expand the domain. 
4. Right-click on Default Domain Policy and click Edit. 
5. Click Computer Configuration, Policies, Windows Settings, Security Settings, Public Key Policies 
and open Certificates Services Client Auto-Enrollment policy. 
6. Choose Enabled from the Configuration Model box, check Renew Expired certificates, update 
pending certificates, and remove revoked certificates. 
7. Also check Update certificates that use certificate templates. 
8. Click Apply; then, click OK. 
9. Click Computer Configuration, Policies, Windows Settings, Security Settings, and Public Key Poli
cies. 
10. Right-click Certificate Services Client - Certificate Enrollment Policy, click Properties. 
11. Choose Enabled from the Configuration Model drop down list. 
12. Ensure that Active Directory Enrollment Policy is checked. 
13. Check Properties of Active Directory Enrollment Policy and ensure that the Enable for automatic 
enrollment and renewal and the Require strong validation during enrollment boxes are 
checked. 
14. Click Apply and then OK to close the dialog boxes. 
161 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
4.6.3 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Certificate Generation and Issuance 
This ITAM solution had a mix of endpoints which included Windows and Linux hosts including some 
pfSense routers. Some of these devices pfSense routers had HTTPS enabled. The PKI implementation 
was extended to further secure these HTTPS services. The overall process includes the following steps: 
1. Generate a certificate signing request (CSR). 
2. Copy the CSR over to the Windows Certificate Authority (CA). 
3. Submit the CSR to the CA service. 
4. Sign the CSR and copying the issued certificate along with the CA certificate to the device. 
5. Generate a Certificate Signing Request. 
6. Open the terminal in a Linux computer with OpenSSL and run openssl req -new -newkey 
rsa:2048 -nodes -keyout server.key -out server.csr 
where server.key and server.csr represent arbitrary names you have chosen. The common 
name field should be the FQDN of the endpoint. 
This will generate two files: the private key file and a CSR file. 
7. Copy the CSR file. 
a. Use any of the file transfer utilities such as SCP or FTP to copy the CSR to the CA. 
b. Alternatively, the CSR can be copied via USB or other means. 
8. Submit the Certificate Signing Request to the CA Service. 
a. Log on to the CA server, go to the command prompt and type Certreq.exe -attrib 
"CertificateTemplate:<Nameofthetemplate>" -submit <pathtoCSR> 
b. An example of what could be typed is certreq.exe -attrib "CertificateTem
plate:WebServer" -submit D:\requestfile.txt 
9. Sign the CSR and copy the Certificates to the device. 
a. To sign the CSR, go to the Windows CA server and perform the following steps: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Click Start > Control Panel > Administrative Tools > Certification Authority. 
Expand the CA name and click Pending Requests. 
Right-click the CSR on the right pane showing a request ID number > Click All 
Tasks > Click Issue. 
162 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
b. Run certutil -ca.cert ca_name.cer from the command prompt 
where ca_name.cer is the arbitrary file name for the CA certificate. 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
10. Copy the client certificate and CA certificate to client system. 
11. Make the application aware of the location of these certificates. Once logged in, the pfSense 
routers in the ITAM build provide links to copy and paste the contents of the private key, the 
certificate file and the CA server certificate. 
4.7 Common PKI Activities 
This section provides instructions for common PKI activities using a Microsoft Certificate Authority (CA) 
in a heterogeneous environment. 
4.7.1 
Generating a Certificate Signing Request from OpenSSL 
1. Run: 
openssl req -new -newkey rsa:2048 -nodes -keyout serverFQDN.key -out 
serverFQDN.csr 
where serverFQDN.key is the private key file and the serverFQDN.csr is the certificate signing 
request file. The files can be arbitrarily named. 
2. When prompted, ensure that the common name field is set to the server FQDN. 
A Certificate Signing Request (CSR) can be generated for as many servers as you need in your 
enterprise. 
3. Copy the CSR file to the Certificate Authority (CA) server for signing. 
4.7.2 
Submitting the CSR to the CA Service 
1. Log on to the CA server. 
2. Go to the command prompt and type: 
Certreq.exe -attrib "CertificateTemplate:<Nameofthetemplate>" -submit 
<pathtoCSR> 
An example command could be: 
certreq.exe -attrib "CertificateTemplate:WebServer" -submit D:\serverFQDN.key 
163 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
4.7.3 
Exporting a Root Certificate from a Microsoft CA 
1. From the command prompt run: 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
Certutil -ca.cert new_ca_filename.cer 
where new_ca_filename.cer is the arbitrary file name for the exported CA certificate. 
The exported CA certificate would need to be copied over to the other servers that would be included in 
Public Key Infrastructure. 
The Microsoft Windows CA root certificate would be in Distinguished Encoding Rules (DER) encoded 
format. Some platforms, especially Linux platforms, may prefer PEM encoding and conversion to Privacy 
Enhanced Mail (PEM) encoding might be necessary. 
4.7.4 
Converting from DER Encoding to PEM Encoding 
1. Run: 
openssl x509 -in DER_CA_CERT.crt -inform der -outform pem -out PEM_CA_CERT.pem 
where DER_CA_CERT.crt is DER encoded and PEM_CA_CERT is the transformed PEM encoded 
certificate. 
Additional information on converting certificates can be found at the following link 
http://info.ssl.com/article.aspx?id=12149. 
4.8 Process Improvement Achievers (PIA) Security Evaluation 
Process Improvement Achievers (PIA) conducted a remote security evaluation of the FS ITAM build. The 
evaluation consisted of running multiple tools against the machines in the lab to find any vulnerabilities 
due to misconfiguration. 
164 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
Appendix A List of Acronyms 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
AD 
CA 
CA 
COTS 
CRADA 
CSR 
.csv 
DER 
DMZ 
FS 
HR 
ID 
ITAM 
IDS 
IP 
NAS 
NCCoE 
NIST 
OS 
PEM 
PKI 
SME 
SQL 
SSL 
STIG 
Active Directory 
CA Technologies 
Certificate Authority 
Commercial Off-The-Shelf 
Collaborative Research and Development Agreement 
Certificate Signing Request 
Comma-Separated Value 
Distinguished Encoding Rules 
Demilitarized Zone 
Financial Sector 
Human Resources 
Identity 
Information Technology Asset Management 
Intrusion Detection System 
Internet Protocol 
Network Attached Storage 
National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Operating System 
Privacy Enhanced Mail 
Public Key Infrastructure 
Subject Matter Expert 
Structured Query Language 
Secure Socket Layer 
Security Technical Implementation Guideline 
165 
NIST SP 1800-5C: IT Asset Management 
TLS 
VLAN 
This publication is available free of charge from: http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-5. 
VM 
VPN 
Transport Layer Security 
Virtual Local Area Network 
Virtual Machine 
Virtual Private Network 



____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________


What Is Risk Management & Why Is It Important?
8/18/26, 12:28 PM What Is Risk Management & Why Is It Important? | HBS Online
https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/risk-management 2/13
8/18/26, 12:28 PM
What Is Risk Management & Why Is It Important? | HBS Online
//online.hbs.edu/blog/post/risk-management)
ttps://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/risk-management)
cle&body=What%20Is%20Risk%20Management%20&%20Why%20Is%20It%20Important?
Businesses can’t operate without risk. Economic, technological, environmental,
and competitive factors introduce obstacles that companies must not only
manage but overcome.
According to 
PwC’s Global Risk Survey
(https://www.pwc.com/us/en/services/consulting/cybersecurity-risk
regulatory/library/global-risk-survey.html), organizations that embrace strategic risk
management are five times more likely to deliver stakeholder confidence and better
business outcomes and two times more likely to expect faster revenue growth.
If you want to 
enhance your job performance
(/blog/post/in-demand-skills) and
identify and mitigate risk more effectively, here’s a breakdown of what risk
management is and why it’s important.
3/13
https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/risk-management
8/18/26, 12:28 PM
What Is Risk Management & Why Is It Important? | HBS Online
Free E-Book
How to Formulate a Successful
Business Strategy
This guide will equip you with the
tools, frameworks, and knowledge to
formulate a successful business
strategy that propels your organization
forward.
Download
now
(/strategy
formulation
ebook)
What Is Risk Management?
Risk management is the systematic process of identifying, assessing, and mitigating
threats or uncertainties that can affect your organization. It involves analyzing risks’
likelihood and impact, developing strategies to minimize harm, and monitoring
measures’ effectiveness.
“Competing successfully in any industry involves some level of risk,” says Harvard
Business School Professor Robert Simons, who teaches the online course 
Execution
Strategy
(/courses/strategy-execution/). “But high-performing businesses with high
pressure cultures are especially vulnerable. As a manager, you need to know how and
why these risks arise and how to avoid them.”
According to 
Strategy Execution
(/courses/strategy-execution/), strategic risk has
three main causes:
Pressures due to growth: This is often caused by an accelerated rate of expansion
that makes staffing or industry knowledge gaps more harmful to your business.
https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/risk-management
4/13
8/18/26, 12:28 PM
What Is Risk Management & Why Is It Important? | HBS Online
Pressures due to culture: While entrepreneurial risk-taking can come with rewards,
executive resistance and internal competition can cause problems.
Pressures due to information management: Since information is key to 
leadership
effective
(/blog/post/characteristics-of-an-effective-leader), gaps in performance
measures can result in decentralized decision-making.
These pressures can lead to several types of risk that you must manage or mitigate to
avoid reputational, financial, or strategic failures. However, risks aren’t always
obvious.
“I think one of the challenges firms face is the ability to properly identify their risks,”
says HBS Professor Eugene Soltes in 
Strategy Execution
(/courses/strategy
execution/).
Therefore, it’s crucial to pinpoint unexpected events or conditions that could
significantly impede your organization’s 
business-strategy).
Related: 
business strategy
(/blog/post/what-is
Business Strategy vs. Strategy Execution: Which Course Is Right for Me?
(/blog/post/business-strategy-vs-strategy-execution)
According to 
comprises:
Strategy Execution
(/courses/strategy-execution/), strategic risk
Operations risk: This occurs when internal operational errors interrupt your
products or services’ flow. For example, shipping tainted products can negatively
affect food distribution companies.
Asset impairment risk: When your company’s assets lose a significant portion of
their current value because of a decreased likelihood of receiving future 
cash flows
(/blog/post/cash-flow-vs-profit). For instance, losing property assets, like a
manufacturing plant, due to a natural disaster.
Competitive risk: Changes in the competitive environment can interrupt your
organization’s ability to 
create value
(/blog/post/value-based-strategy) and
differentiate its offerings—eventually leading to a significant loss in revenue.
Franchise risk: When your organization’s value erodes because stakeholders lose
confidence in its objectives. This primarily results from failing to control any of the
strategic risk sources listed above.
5/13
https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/risk-management
8/18/26, 12:28 PM
What Is Risk Management & Why Is It Important? | HBS Online
Understanding these risks is essential to ensuring your organization’s long-term
success. Here’s a deeper dive into why risk management is important.
Explore why effective risk management is critical to long-term business success—and
how it can sharpen strategy, improve decisions, and reveal new opportunities in the
video below. Be sure to subscribe to our 
YouTube channel
(https://www.youtube.com/@HBSOnline) for more explainer content.
Play
Play
Play
2:09
2:09
2:09
Risk is unavoidable in business, whether from market shifts, technology changes, or new
competition. But when managed effectively, it can protect your strategy, strengthen decision
making, and unlock new growth opportunities.Learn more about risk management on our
Business Insights Blog: https://hbs.me/2fyr9f8dExplore our Strategy Execution course:
https://hbs.me/2bz8c8nx#Strategy #RiskManagement #BusinessExplained
4 Reasons Why Risk Management Is
Important
1. Protects Organization’s Reputation
https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/risk-management
6/13
8/18/26, 12:28 PM
What Is Risk Management & Why Is It Important? | HBS Online
In many cases, effective risk management proactively protects your organization
from incidents that can affect its reputation.
“Franchise risk is a concern for all businesses,“ Simons says in 
Strategy Execution
(/courses/strategy-execution/). “However, it's especially pressing for businesses
whose reputations depend on the trust of key constituents.”
For example, airlines are particularly susceptible to franchise risk because of
unforeseen events, such as flight delays and cancellations caused by weather or
mechanical failure. While such incidents are considered operational risks, they can
be incredibly damaging.
In 2016, 
Delta Airlines
(https://money.cnn.com/2016/09/07/technology/delta
computer-outage-cost) experienced a national computer outage, resulting in over
2,000 flight cancellations. Delta not only lost an estimated $150 million but took a hit
to 
its reputation as a reliable airline
(https://www.azcentral.com/story/money/business/consumers/2016/08/09/computer
outage-could-tarnish-deltas-on-time-reputation/88503442/) that prided itself on
“canceling cancellations.”
While Delta bounced back, the incident illustrates how mitigating operational errors
can make or break your organization.
2. Minimizes Losses
Most businesses create risk management teams to avoid major financial losses. Yet,
various risks can still impact their bottom lines.
A 
Vault Platform study
(https://vaultplatform.com/press/news/workplace-misconduct
cost-u-s-businesses-20-billion-in-past-year-new-study/) found that dealing with
workplace misconduct cost U.S. businesses over $20 billion in 2021. In addition,
Soltes says in 
Strategy Execution
(/courses/strategy-execution/) that corporate fines
for misconduct have risen 40-fold in the U.S. over the last 20 years.
One way to mitigate financial losses related to employee misconduct is by
implementing internal controls. According to 
Strategy Execution
(/courses/strategy
execution/), internal controls are the policies and procedures designed to ensure
reliable accounting information and safeguard company assets.
7/13
https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/risk-management
8/18/26, 12:28 PM
What Is Risk Management & Why Is It Important? | HBS Online
“Managers use internal controls to limit the opportunities employees have to expose
the business to risk,” Simons says in the course.
One company that could have benefited from implementing internal controls is
Volkswagen (VW). In 2015, VW whistle-blowers revealed that the company’s
engineers deliberately manipulated diesel vehicles’ emissions data to make them
appear more environmentally friendly.
This led to severe consequences, including regulatory penalties, expensive vehicle
recalls, and legal settlements—all of which resulted in significant financial losses. By
2018, U.S. authorities had extracted 
$25 billion
(https://www.propublica.org/article/how-vw-paid-25-billion-for-dieselgate-and-got
off-easy) in fines, penalties, civil damages, and restitution from the company.
Had VW maintained more rigorous internal controls to ensure transparency,
compliance, and proper oversight of its engineering practices, perhaps it could have
detected—or even averted—the situation.
Related: 
ethics)
What Are Business Ethics & Why Are They Important?
(/blog/post/business
3. Encourages Innovation and Growth
Risk management isn’t just about avoiding negative outcomes. It can also be the
catalyst that drives your organization’s innovation and growth.
“Risks may not be pleasant to think about, but they’re inevitable if you want to push
your business to innovate and remain competitive,” Simons says in 
Strategy
Execution
(/courses/strategy-execution/).
According to 
PwC
(https://www.pwc.com/us/en/library/pulse-survey/managing
business-risks.html), 83 percent of companies’ business strategies focus on growth,
despite risks and mixed economic signals. In 
Strategy Execution
(/courses/strategy
execution/), Simons notes that competitive risk is a challenge you must constantly
monitor and address.
8/13
https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/risk-management
8/18/26, 12:28 PM
What Is Risk Management & Why Is It Important? | HBS Online
“Any firm operating in a competitive market must focus its attention on changes in
the external environment that could impair its ability to create value for its
customers,” Simons says.
This requires incorporating boundary systems—explicit statements that define and
communicate risks to avoid—to ensure internal controls don’t extinguish innovation.
“Boundary systems are essential levers in businesses to give people freedom,”
Simons says. “In such circumstances, you don’t want to stifle innovation or
entrepreneurial behavior by telling people how to do their jobs. And if you want to
remain competitive, you’ll need to innovate and adapt.”
Featured Course
Strategy Execution
Successfully implement strategy
within your organization.
Netflix is an example of how risk management can inspire innovation. In the early
2000s, the company was primarily known for its DVD-by-mail rental service. With
growing competition from video rental stores, Netflix went against the grain and
introduced its streaming service. This changed the market, resulting in a 
booming
industry
(https://www.statista.com/outlook/dmo/digital-media/video-on
demand/video-streaming-svod/worldwide) nearly a decade later.
Netflix’s innovation didn’t stop there. Once the streaming services market became
highly competitive, the company shifted once again to gain a competitive edge. It
ventured into producing original content, which ultimately helped differentiate its
platform and attract additional subscribers.
By offering more freedom within internal controls, you can 
(/blog/post/innovation-resources) and constant growth.
4. Enhances Decision-Making
encourage innovation
9/13
https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/risk-management
8/18/26, 12:28 PM
What Is Risk Management & Why Is It Important? | HBS Online
Risk management also provides a structured framework for decision-making. This
can be beneficial if your business is inclined toward risks that are difficult to manage.
By pulling data from existing control systems to develop hypothetical scenarios, you
can discuss and debate strategies’ efficacy before executing them.
“Interactive control systems are the formal information systems managers use to
personally involve themselves in the decision activities of subordinates,” Simons says
in 
Strategy Execution
(/courses/strategy-execution/). “Decision activities that relate
to and impact strategic uncertainties.”
JPMorgan Chase, one of the most prominent financial institutions in the world, is
particularly 
susceptible to cyber risks
(https://www.jpmorgan.com/privacy) because it
compiles vast amounts of 
According to 
sensitive customer data
(/blog/post/data-privacy).
PwC
(https://www.pwc.com/us/en/library/pulse-survey/managing
business-risks.html), cybersecurity is the number one business risk on managers’
minds, with 78 percent worried about more frequent or broader cyber attacks.
Using 
data science techniques
(/blog/post/what-is-data-science) like machine
learning algorithms enables JPMorgan Chase’s leadership not only to detect and
prevent cyber attacks but address and mitigate risk.
10/13
https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/risk-management
8/18/26, 12:28 PM
What Is Risk Management & Why Is It Important? | HBS Online
Free E-Book
How to Formulate a Successful
Business Strategy
This guide will equip you with the
tools, frameworks, and knowledge to
formulate a successful business
strategy that propels your organization
forward.
Download
now
(/strategy
formulation
ebook)
Start Managing Your Organization's Risk
Risk management is essential to business. While some risk is inevitable, your ability
to identify and mitigate it can benefit your organization.
But you can’t plan for everything. According to the 
Harvard Business Review
(https://hbr.org/2020/11/the-risks-you-cant-foresee), some risks are so remote that no
one could have imagined them. Some result from a perfect storm of incidents, while
others materialize rapidly and on enormous scales.
By taking an 
online strategy course
(/blog/post/online-strategy-courses), you can
build the knowledge and skills to identify strategic risks and ensure they don’t
undermine your business. For example, through an interactive learning experience,
Strategy Execution
(/courses/strategy-execution/) enables you to draw insights from
real-world business examples and better understand how to approach risk
management.
https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/risk-management
11/13
8/18/26, 12:28 PM
What Is Risk Management & Why Is It Important? | HBS Online
Do you want to mitigate your organization’s risks? Explore 
(/courses/strategy-execution/)—one of our 
Strategy Execution
online strategy courses
(/subjects/strategy/)—and download our 
free strategy e-book
(/strategy-formulation
ebook) to gain the insights to build a successful strategy.
Author:
Kate Gibson
Topics:
Strategy
12/13
https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/risk-management
Harvard
Business
School
(https://www.hbs.edu)
© President & Fellows of Harvard College Site Map (https://www.hbs.edu/siteindex/)
Jobs (https://www.hbs.edu/employment)
Harvard University (https://www.harvard.edu)
Trademarks
(https://trademark.harvard.edu/pages/trademark
notice/)
Policies (https://www.hbs.edu/about/campus
and-culture/policies)
Accessibility
(https://accessibility.harvard.edu/)
Digital Accessibility
(https://accessibility.huit.harvard.edu/digital
accessibility-policy



__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________


Memory Reward Inflation in Self-Improving LLM Agents
Mohammad Asadolahi1, Amir Amini2, Samira Talebi3, Amirfarhad Farhadi4, and Azadeh
Zamanifar5
1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University Of North Texas, TX, USA ,
MohammadAsadolahi@my.unt.edu
2Department of Computer Science, Edge Hill University, UK , AmirAmini@outlook.com
3Department of Computer Science, University of Cincinnati, OH, USA , talebisa@mail.uc.edu
4School of Computer Engineering, Iran University of Science and Technology, Tehran, Iran ,
am_farhadi@mail.iust.ac.ir
5Department of Computer Engineering, SR.C, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran ,
azamanifar@iau.ac.ir
arXiv:2608.00017v1  [cs.AI]  29 Jun 2026
June 2026
Abstract
Self-improving LLM agents increasingly learn from experience without updating any weights.
Each episode is stored in an external memory, scored, and retrieved for similar future tasks to
shape later behavior. Viewed through a reward lens, the stored score is a proxy reward for an
implicit, non-parametric policy. Each retrieved episode then becomes a policy-improvement step
whose reliability hinges on how that score is produced. In deployment, ground-truth labels are
unavailable, so the stored reward is at best an LLM assessment. This substitution creates a
failure mode, the Echo Gap, across the memory baseed self-improving agents and model families
studied. Incorrect episodes receive inflated rewards; thus, the agent preferentially reuses the very
mistakes it has most confident in. Because the error compounds through memory rather than
averaging out and the confirming judge’s errors remain correlated with the original self-grading
bias, so it cannot identify which memories are overvalued. The missing property is formalized
as the Error-Independence Assumption (EIA), which we prove is a necessary condition for
correcting the inflation, not merely a description of a good verifier: a usable signal must track
truth and decorrelate its error from the memory bias, and the recoverable payoff is a closed-form
function of exactly those two quantities. We further show the inflation compounds not only
when retrieval ranks by the stored score but also under plain similarity retrieval which is the
regime the deployed agent uses. Finally, the answer-free de-inflation algorithm LUCID delivers a
consistent end-to-end gain on the BIRD text-to-SQL benchmark. It raises execution accuracy to
56.9%, above both a Memento-style self-graded agent (54.0%, a +2.9-point mean gain across
seeds) and a memory-less agent of identical architecture (52.4%).
Keywords: LLM agents, self-improving agents, agentic memory, experiential memory, reward
inflation, Agentic self-verification, memory calibration, case-based reasoning.
1 Introduction
Large Language Model (LLM) agents are increasingly designed to improve their behavior from past
experience without updating any model parameter. Improvement comes not from fine-tuning but
from a memory: the agent stores past episodes, assigns each a utility score, retrieves the episodes
1
judged for similar future tasks, and writes each new episode back into the bank. Although the
LLM stays parametrically fixed, the agent future behavior changes through the memories it chooses
to use. This is attractive because it offers online adaptation without fine-tuning, personalization
without retraining, and reusable experience without changing the underlying model. Viewed through
a reward lens, such a memory-augmented agent is a memory decision process over stored experience
in which retrieval plays the role of an implicit, non-parametric policy [1–4]. This lens is used here to
study reward integrity rather than policy optimization.1
Because the stored score decides how memories are used, imitated or avoided, it acts as a reward
signal, and label-free memory learning becomes a proxy-reward problem. The agent optimizes
future behavior using a signal that may reward what merely appears successful rather than what is
genuinely correct. Its effectiveness therefore depends on whether the stored utility score reflects true
task success.
In benchmark settings, an episode’s score can often be derived from ground-truth labels: a factual
answer is checked against a provided gold answer, a program against tests, a database query by
execution. In real world problems, however, such labels are usually unavailable when the agent writes
to memory. The practical substitute is LLM grading: the agent, or a closely related LLM judge,
assigns the utility score and decides whether an episode is worth storing before its true success is
known [5–7]. The closest known relative is reward hacking, where a generator that also grades itself
raises its self-assessed score without improving true quality [8]. The Echo Gap is the memory-specific
and more dangerous form: the inflated score is not transient but written into persistent storage,
and because these memories are retrieved, imitated, the error compounds through reuse rather than
averaging out. This makes inflation a recurring risk for agents that evolve memory from experience
without labels, across the models studied here. The agent does not merely store noisy memories; it
retrieves and reinforces the ones it has most overvalued, so a label-free memory loop can severely
magnify the model’s own blind spots.
In the banks studied in this paper, more capable re-graders are more truth-aligned, yet their
errors still correlate with the original self-grade bias: a verifier that shares the generator’s blind
spots can reproduce the same ranking distortion even when it is more capable overall.
This missing property is formalized as the Error-Independence Assumption (EIA). Let Vi be a
verifier score and νi = Vi −Ui the verifier error. In utility correction, where a verifier is incorporated
into the stored memory score, a useful verifier must estimate correctness reliably and avoid errors
that are correlated with the original memory bias. Formally, Corr(V,U) should be maximized, while
|Corr(ν,b)| should be minimized. This explains why de-correlated information channels, such as
retrieval-based factual checking or execution-based tests, can provide useful corrective signals when
parametric re-grading remains biased. It also clarifies the role of the negative result reported here:
parametric judging is not claimed to be impossible in general; rather, in the label-free memory
setting studied here, capability alone did not suffice to provide the error de- correlation needed for
reliable correction.
This mechanism is first studied at the level of the stored utilities themselves, showing that
label-blind global calibration cannot correct heterogeneous, per-memory reward inflation because a
global map of stored utilities cannot detect which memories are overvalued. Per-memory demotion
is then shown to improve the bank when the verifier satisfies EIA. This yields a principled correction
rule for utility updates: do not merely rescale the memory scores; use a memory-specific signal whose
errors do not echo the original bias.
The second part examines whether the Echo Gap translates into behavioral degradation in a full
1Code, data, and per-episode memory traces are available at https://github.com/MohammadAsadolahi/
Reliable-Memory-Agents-in-the-Wild.
2
end-to-end memory agent. This part proceeds cautiously, with evidence on full BIRD text-to-SQL, a
third-party benchmark with official execution-accuracy evaluation, using a faithful Memento-style
retrieve–inject–write loop in which memories are written and reused for similar tasks without access
to ground-truth labels. The proposed method, applies an answer-free de-inflation and consistently
outperforms the self-graded baseline across seeds.
The contributions are organized along three axes (phenomenon, diagnosis, and mitigation):
• (C1) The Echo Gap. We define and formalize the Echo Gap as frequency-correlated reward
inflation in label-free self-improving LLM memory. It appears on live factual banks across
model families, and, unlike a static grading error, the inflation compounds multiplicatively,
both through retrieval and, in the similarity-retrieval regime the deployed agent actually uses,
through the trust the planner places in inflated memories (Theorem 1).
• (C2) A diagnosis of why correction is hard. A dynamical analysis of the write-back
loop shows that self-grade inflation drives the bank to a corrupted attractor matches the
observed bank corruption on the real agent. We prove the Error-Independence Assumption
(EIA) is a necessary condition for de-inflation: the recoverable payoff is a closed-form function
of exactly its two axes, so a verifier whose error echoes the self-grade cannot help at any step
size, and stronger or different-family re-grading, judge ensembles, and generic memory filtering
(confidence thresholding, self-consistency pruning, budget-matched random pruning) do not
supply the required decorrelation on these banks.
• (C3) LUCID The paper introduces LUCID (Leniency-corrected Utility Calibration via
Independent Debiasing) algorithm, an answer-free general de-inflation on memory agents, and
presents end-to-end evidence on BIRD text-to-SQL: without any ground-truth label in the
loop, it improves a Memento-style memory agent over tested baselines, increasing accuracy
due to reward de-inflation.
The broader implication is that label-free self-improvement should be understood as a reward
design problem where do do not have a gold label in the real world settings. Reliable self-improving
agents therefore require reward evidence with failure modes that differ from those of the agent itself:
de-correlated signals for memory reward correction.
2 Related Work
Memory-augmented and self-improving agents. Prior work studies LLM agents that im
prove without updating model parameters by storing, retrieving, and reusing past experience,
including episodic memory systems, case-based memory, and reflective agents that use feedbacks
or self-refinement [2–4]. These systems build on broader foundations for LLM agents and retrieval:
interleaved reasoning-and-acting [9], chain-of-thought prompting [10], retrieval-augmented generation
[11], and long-horizon memory for simulated agents [12]. A closely related recent system, Reasoning
Bank, distills reasoning strategies from self-judged successful and failed episodes and reports gains
from memory-driven self-evolution [13]. These results do not contradict such gains; they identify a
regime boundary. Self-graded memory can help when “looks right” tracks “is correct,” and becomes
risky when the two diverge. The present work focuses on a dependency that cuts across these designs:
when stored episodes are scored by LLM-grades, that score becomes a reward-like signal that governs
which episodes are later trusted and reused.
3
Reinforcement learning over agent memory. Agrowingline of work casts memory management
itself as a learned policy, optimizing what to store, retrieve, or discard with reinforcement learning
over outcome rewards [14–17], or framing retrieval as a contextual-bandit decision [18]. These
methods learn a memory policy under an assumed-reliable reward. The present contribution is
upstream and complementary: when that reward is a LLM-grade it is systematically inflated, and
an answer-free signal repairs it. Reliable reward integrity is a prerequisite for any reward-driven
memory learner, so the Echo Gap and its correction apply directly to these systems.
Self-evaluation and LLM-as-a-judge. Self-consistency, LLM-as-a-judge methods, self-refinement,
and process-reward-style judging use model-generated judgments as label-free or weakly supervised
signals [3, 7, 19, 20]. In many settings these judgments are used locally for selection, reranking, or
critique. In persistent memory, however, the same judgment has a stronger role: it determines which
past episodes are retrieved later. The relevant question is therefore not only whether a judge is
accurate on average, but whether its errors are decorrelated from the original self-grade bias. Prior
work documents that LLM judges exhibit position, verbosity, and self-preference biases [21, 22],
consistent with the finding here that stronger or different-family re-graders do not automatically
repair self-graded memory. Relatedly, panels of such judges collapse to a fraction of their nominal
independent votes when their errors are correlated [23], a panel-level form of the decorrelation EIA
requires.
Calibration, reward mis-specification, and verification. Post-hoc calibration can improve
the numerical interpretation of scores, but it does not solve heterogeneous, per-memory self-grade
inflation when the correction is label-blind. This connects our setting to reward mis-specification
and reward hacking, where a proxy reward can be repeatedly optimized despite being misaligned
with true utility [8]. A parallel literature shows that useful feedback can come from non-gold signals
such as execution, tests, static analysis, metamorphic testing, retrieval evidence, and agreement
checks [24–28]. The framework developed here explains when such signals are useful for memory
correction: their failure modes must differ from the model’s own self-grade.
Memory poisoning, repair, and intrinsic self-correction. Adversarial memory-poisoning
work studies settings where external attackers inject misleading information into agent memory
[29–31]. The setting here is different: the corruption is endogenous. The agent writes its own wrong
experience with an inflated score, and retrieval later amplifies that mistake. This is also related to
evidence that LLM-maintained memories can degrade under continual updating [32] and to work
showing that LLMs often fail to self-correct without external feedback [33]. More broadly, label-free
evaluation is underidentified without assumptions on error independence or decorrelation [34, 35][36].;
EIA is a memory-specific instance of this requirement. Self-grade inflation is itself an instance of
the broad reward-misalignment family, and is not claimed here as a new species of bias. The Echo
Gap’s contribution is mechanistic and is summarized in Table 1: among these failure modes it is
the only one that is at once endogenous, label-free, compounds through retrieval and reuse rather
than acting once (Theorem 1), and is paired with a correction criterion (EIA) we prove necessary for
de-inflation. The novelty is therefore not the existence of inflation but its loop-amplified, correctable
form in self-improving memory agents.
4
Phenomenon
endogenous label-free compounds via reuse correction criterion
Reward hacking (RL) [8]
LLM-as-a-judge / self-preference [21, 22]
Self-correction failure [33]
Memory poisoning [30, 31]
Memory degradation [32]
Echo Gap (ours)
✗
✗
✓
✗
✓
✓
✗
✓
✓
—
✓
✓
opt. drift
✗
✗
✓
partial
✓(eb/T)
—
—
—
defenses
—
EIA
Table 1: The Echo Gap relative to known reward-misalignment phenomena. It is the only one that is
simultaneously endogenous, arises in the label-free write regime, compounds multiplicatively through
retrieval/reuse, via a ranking channel (eb/T) and a trust channel that persists under similarity-only
retrieval (Theorem 1), and comes with a criterion (EIA), proved necessary for de-inflation, for which
label-free signals correct it.
3 Self-Graded Memory and the Echo Gap
This section studies label-free memory improvement in LLM agents through a persistent memory
loop as past episodes are stored, scored, retrieved and exposed to the agent for new given tasks, and
reused to influence future behavior. It defines the memory loop and its signals, formalizes the Echo
Gap, and then shows that the failure mode appears in live factual memory banks. It also introduces
the single correction principle used in the paper: answer-free de-inflation for demoting the reward of
memories that a de-correlated, oracle-free signal flags as inflated, so the agent stops trusting them
as correct past experiences and may use them as wrong answer references to solve a given task.
3.1 Memory Loop and Signals
A memory bank contains episodes
mi =(qi,ai,Qi),
(1)
where, in Equation (1), qi is the task or query, ai is the agent’s response, and Qi is the stored utility
score attached to the episode. On a new task q, the agent selects or exposes a set of prior episodes
using a memory policy
πmem(mi | q),
(2)
The memory policy in Equation (2) may depend on semantic similarity, stored utility Qi, recency,
task metadata, or a combination of these factors. The selected memories are injected into the context
of agent, displayed as prior precedents, weighted by the planner, or otherwise made available to the
agent before it produces the next response. The new episode is then scored and written back into
the memory bank for future similar tasks.
The important point is that Qi is not passive metadata. Once a stored score affects the agent’s
future responses, or even which memories are selected, trusted, or imitated, it becomes a reward-like
signal for a non-parametric learning loop. The base model parameters remain frozen, but future
behavior changes through the memories the agent chooses to reuse. In this sense, retrieval and reuse
of past cases act as an implicit policy-improvement mechanism whose reliability depends on whether
the stored utility score reflects true downstream value. To cover both cases, we use the general term
reuse exposure for the event that a memory is retrieved, injected, trusted and made influential for a
later decision.
We focus on the label-free real world problems regime, in which the agent must write to memory
when there is no ground-truth available. The assessment of whether a solution is right or wrong
5
is instead produced by the agent itself, by a related model, or by an LLM-as-a-judge. This is the
setting in which memory learning becomes vulnerable to proxy-reward failure: the system may
reinforce a wrong solution that received a positive score, one that merely appears successful rather
than being correct.
To analyze this loop, the deployment-time scores are distinguished from the post-hoc utility used
only for measurement. Each memory mi carries the three signals of Equation (3):
ri,
Vi, Ui.
(3)
The LLM grade ri is the reward score assigned by an LLM at write time in label-free deployment,
typically the agent grading its own episode (a self-grade), or a closely related LLM judge. The
verifier score Vi is an audit signal produced by some alternative channel, retrieved evidence, execution
feedback, or invariant checks. The ground-truth utility Ui is used only for post-hoc measurement,
oracle ceilings, and theorem statements. It is never used by the non-oracle memory loop.
Equation (4) defines the self-grade bias bi and the verifier error νi:
bi = ri −Ui,
νi = Vi −Ui.
(4)
The reuse count ni denotes how often memory mi is exposed to the agent as an influential
precedent under the memory policy. When Ui is binary, Ui = 1 denotes a genuinely correct or useful
episode and Ui = 0 denotes an incorrect, misleading, or harmful episode. The same notation also
applies to continuous utility scores.
3.2 The Echo Gap
The Echo Gap is frequency-correlated reward inflation in a memory loop. It has two components.
First, the self-grade inflates wrong or low-utility memories:
E[bi | Ui = 0] > 0.
(5)
The condition in Equation (5) says that incorrect episodes are scored as more useful than their true
downstream value justifies.
Second, the inflation is operationally amplified by reuse among wrong memories, a positive
covariance stated in Equation (6):
Cov(bi,ni | Ui = 0) > 0.
Equivalently, the empirical sections report the conditional association in Equation (7),
Corr(bi,ni | Ui = 0),
(6)
(7)
which asks whether the wrong memories that are most overvalued are also the wrong memories
whose high trust scores most strongly influence future decisions.
Figure 1 summarizes this feedback mechanism.
Together, the two conditions in Equations (5) and (6) distinguish the Echo Gap from ordinary
miscalibration. A one-time calibration error can make reported scores numerically inaccurate without
necessarily changing future behavior. The Echo Gap is a feedback loop: a wrong memory receives
an inflated score, the memory exposes it to agent as correct solution, the agent conditions on it
as a trusted precedent, and subsequent write-back can reinforce the same pattern. The failure is
therefore not merely noisy memory, but inflation that is coupled to memory reuse.
6
Figure 1: Conceptual mechanism of the Echo Gap in self improving memory agents and LUCID
which demote the inflated past experiences
Why the inflation compounds: a retrieval-and-trust amplification result. The covariance
condition above is not merely a statistical curiosity; it provably amplifies the agent’s exposure to
wrong memories, and it does so through two distinct channels. The influence a memory exerts
on future behavior is the product of how often it is retrieved and how strongly the agent trusts it
once retrieved. Write the influence of memory i as infl(i) = π(i)τ(Qi), where π(i) is its retrieval
probability and τ(·) ≥ 0 is a non-decreasing trust weight with which the agent conditions on a
retrieved memory of stored score Qi. In a Memento-style loop the stored self-grade is injected
as exactly such a utility/trust annotation (Section 3.1). Let the reuse-weighted error mass be
M= i:Ui=0infl(i), the share of influence spent on wrong memories. The two channels can both,
separately, turn a static grading error into a compounding one.
Theorem 1 (Echo-Gap amplification: retrieval and trust channels). Compare an honest bank (bi=0,
so Qi=Ui) with an inflated bank that raises the stored score of wrong memories to Qi=b ∈ (0,1]
while leaving correct memories at Qi=1; let W and R be the numbers of wrong and correct memories.
The amplification A := Minfl/Mhon factorizes as A = Aret ·Atr into a retrieval channel and a trust
channel.
(i) (Retrieval channel.) Under score-ranked softmax retrieval π(i) ∝ eQi/T, T > 0 (top-k is the
T →0limit), with flat trust τ ≡ const,
1 ≤ Aret = eb/T (W +Re1/T)
Web/T +Re1/T 
≤ eb/T,
(8)
with Aret → eb/T in the sparse-error limit W ≪ Re1/T, and Aret = 1 under reward-blind
(similarity-only) retrieval. The same upper bound Aret ≤ ebmax/T holds for heterogeneous
inflation, with bmax the largest per-memory inflation.
(ii) (Trust channel.) Under any retrieval rule whose probabilities π(i) do not depend on the stored
score and in particular similarity-only retrieval, so that Aret = 1: if the agent conditions on
7
retrieved memories through a trust weight that is strictly increasing on {0,b} with τ(0) > 0,
then
Atr = τ(b)
τ(0) > 1.
(9)
Inflation therefore amplifies the influence of wrong memories even when retrieval is reward
blind: it does not change which memories are retrieved, but it raises the trust with which each
retrieved wrong memory is reused, by the factor τ(b)/τ(0).
The proof is in Appendix B. Both bounds separate the Echo Gap from a one-shot grading
error: the inflation does not average out, it is amplified multiplicatively in how often and how
trustingly wrong memories are reused. The two channels cover the two retrieval regimes the paper
studies, so the theory is no longer confined to a regime the main experiments do not use. (i) The
retrieval channel is the score-ranked memory-bank regime of Section 3.4: amplification reaches eb/T
and grows as retrieval becomes greedier (smaller T), and Aret = 1 only when retrieval ignores the
stored score entirely. (ii) The trust channel is the regime the deployed agent actually occupies:
the memory agent (BIRD experiment) loop retrieves by SimCSE similarity alone (Aret = 1) yet
the stored self-grade is shown to the agent as a trust/utility annotation and not used to re-rank
(Section 6.1), exactly the score-conditioned trust τ(Qi) the theorem assumes, so inflation still
compounds through Atr = τ(b)/τ(0) > 1 rather than through retrieval mass. This resolves the
apparent gap that under similarity retrieval “A = 1”: amplification under similarity retrieval is
real, it simply runs through trust rather than ranking. The two channels are complementary and
multiply (A = AretAtr); a deployment can sit anywhere on the spectrum from pure-similarity (Aret=1,
trust-only) to pure-softmax (τ flat, ranking-only).
The trust channel is not hypothetical: it is what the end-to-end agent measures. In BIRD
experiment the stored self-grade is binary and “trusted” means r=1, so inflation moves a wrong
memory from the untrusted set (τ(0)) into the trusted set (τ(1)); the memory-to-behavior coupling
κ≈0.38 measured on the real agent (Section G), error rising with the trusted-but-wrong fraction of
the retrieved set, is precisely the empirical signature of Atr > 1, and the write-back dynamics of
that trust amplification are analyzed in Theorem 2. The result thus formalizes, rather than replaces,
the empirical coupling Cov(bi,ni | Ui=0) > 0 reported below for the score-ranked banks and the
coupling κ > 0 measured for the similarity-retrieval agent.
3.3 What a de-inflation signal must satisfy: EIA
De-inflation lowers the stored reward of memories whose grading appears inflated, so the agent stops
trusting them as correct precedents. For this to help rather than hurt, the signal that drives the
demotion must not reproduce the error pattern that created the inflated scores. Let Vi be a verifier
score and νi = Vi −Ui its error. A verifier satisfies EIA on a validation bank if it both tracks truth
and decorrelates its error from the self-grade bias, as in Equation (10):
| Corr(ν,b)| < τdec,
Corr(V,U) > τtru.
(10)
The two requirements are independent: a verifier can be decorrelated from the bias yet uninformative
about truth, or more truth-aligned on average while still erring in the same direction as the self-grade.
The latter is the dangerous case, since demoting by such a signal can reintroduce the very distortion
it was meant to remove. EIA is an offline signal-selection criterion: it reads Ui only on a validation
bank to decide whether a candidate signal is trustworthy, after which the selected signal is used in
label-free deployment. We treat it as directional rather than tied to a particular cutoff (the empirical
separation is wide; Section 4.2). Appendix C discusses its status, a constructive sufficient condition
8
under which decorrelation can be designed for rather than hoped for, and why parametric re-graders
fail to meet it.
EIA is moreover a necessary condition for de-inflation, not merely a description of a good verifier.
Consider any de-inflation that pulls the stored score toward the verifier, Q′
i = Qi − α(Qi − Vi), and
decompose the verifier error as ν = βb + η with β = Cov(ν,b)/Var(b) and Cov(η,b) = 0. Then
(Proposition 2, proved in Appendix B) the corrected inflation has variance
Var(b′) = 1−α(1−β) 2Var(b)+α2Var(η),
(11)
so if the verifier echoes the self-grade strongly (β ≥ 1) then Var(b′) > Var(b) for every step α ∈ (0,1]
(demotion can only re-inject inflation), whereas the inflation removed at the optimal step,
Var(b) − min
α 
Var(b′) =
(1 −β)2Var(b)2
(1 −β)2Var(b) +Var(η) ,
(12)
is strictly increasing as the error decorrelates (β → 0) and as it vanishes (Var(η) → 0). The
recoverable payoff is thus a closed-form function of exactly EIA’s two axes, so the criterion is derived
from the correction objective rather than posited.
Deployment and the precision condition. In deployment we apply de-inflation as a targeted
de-inflation: a detector flags an episode as likely wrong using only answer-free evidence, and we lower
that memory’s stored reward, never re-solving the task nor using any ground-truth label. Because
the intervention acts only on flagged episodes, a second quantity governs whether it helps: detector
precision ρ = Pr[Ui = 0 | flagged]. With expected per-flag gain gr > 0 on truly wrong memories
and loss hr > 0 on good ones, the per-flag effect is ρgr −(1−ρ)hr, so de-inflation is beneficial in
expectation iff
ρ >ρ⋆ := hr
gr +hr
.
(13)
EIA concerns the signal (its error must be decorrelated, Equation (12)); precision concerns is that
de-inflated memories must be wrong often enough)=. An answer-free signal must be decorrelated by
construction’ its de-inflation precision we verify empirically. Both hold for the signal used in our
experiments.
3.4 Bank-Level Evidence
The Echo Gap studied to determine if it appears in live memory banks. The bank-level diagnose
mechanism studied by asking whether label-free self-grading inflates wrong memories and whether,
among wrong memories, the most overvalued ones receive more reuse exposure. Later sections study
whether suitable verification signals can correct the bank and whether the same mechanism produces
behavioral harm in a full agentic loop.
Factual memory banks. We begin with factual question-answering memories, where post-hoc
correctness can be measured. Each memory contains a question, the agent’s answer, and a self-grade
written without access to the gold answer. Ground truth is used only after the memory has been
written, to measure whether the self-grade matched correctness. This keeps the experiment in the
label-free regime defined in Section 3.
The main bank uses Anthropic Claude Haiku 4.5 as the answering and self-grading agent. To
test whether the phenomenon is tied to a single model family, we also construct self-graded banks
from OpenAI GPT-5.4-mini and the frontier GPT-5.4 model on the same factual distribution. The
9
purpose of this cross-vendor reproduction is not to produce an exact model leaderboard, because the
gold-judging setup is not identical across all banks. Rather, it tests whether the same failure mode
appears outside the original model family.
Metrics. Three quantities are reported. First, each memory’s self-grade bias is computed in
Equation (14):
bi = ri −Ui.
(14)
Positive bias means that the memory is valued more highly than its ground-truth utility justifies.
Second, for binary correctness, leniency is reported in Equation (15):
Pr[ri = correct | Ui = 0],
(15)
the probability that the model endorses its own wrong answer as correct. This is the headline severity
measure: it asks how often wrong memories are admitted as if they were correct.
Third, the analysis measures whether the bias is operationally amplified by reuse among wrong
memories, via the covariance in Equation (16):
Cov(bi,ni | Ui = 0),
and, for scale-free reporting, the corresponding conditional correlation in Equation (17):
Corr(bi,ni | Ui = 0).
(16)
(17)
Here ni is the reuse count of memory mi under the memory policy. The Echo Gap is present when
wrong memories are overvalued and receive later reuse exposure.
Model
Role
Leniency
95% CI
Claude Haiku 4.5 (Anthropic) self-grader
GPT-5.4-mini (OpenAI)
frontier GPT-5.4 (OpenAI)
self-grader
self-grader
0.31
0.54
0.41
[0.26, 0.35]
[0.49, 0.58]
[0.36, 0.47]
Table 2: Self-grading endorses wrong memories across model families. Leniency is Pr[self = correct |
U =0], pooled over three seeds. The table establishes reproduction of the failure mode, not an exact
vendor comparison.
Self-grading inflates wrong memories. Table 2 reports leniency on the factual banks. The
Claude Haiku 4.5 bank endorses 31% of its own wrong facts, with a 95% confidence interval of [26,
35]. The cross-vendor banks show the same qualitative pattern: GPT-5.4-mini endorses 54% of its
wrong answers, and the frontier GPT-5.4 model still endorses 41%. These numbers should not be
read as a direct model ranking, because the gold-judging setup is not identical across all banks. The
robust conclusion is more conservative and more important: self-grade inflation appears in multiple
model families, and it persists even at higher capability and LLM frontier models.
For these banks, the aggregate bias is positive, and the error is heterogeneous across topics.
This matters because a uniform offset could in principle be handled by a simple calibration shift.
The observed pattern is instead memory-specific: some wrong memories are much more inflated
than others, while some high-scoring memories are genuinely useful. This heterogeneity is why later
sections study per-memory correction rather than only global recalibration.
10
Under score-ranked reuse the inflation also couples to the memory policy: the bias and reuse
count are positively associated among wrong memories, Cov(bi,ni | Ui=0) > 0 (Equations (16)–(17)),
so the memories most promoted by the bank are disproportionately the ones whose utility was
most overestimated. This is the bank-level signature of the Echo Gap, and it motivates the three
questions examined next: whether an LLM-as-a-judge can re-grade and de-inflate the bank or merely
reproduces the same bias (Section 4), why global calibration cannot (Section 5), and whether the
same inflation degrades a full agentic loop (Section 6).
4 Verifier Criteria: When a Stronger Judge Is Not Enough
The natural response to bank-level inflation is to audit the bank with another model: a stronger
LLM, a different-family LLM, or an LLM-as-a-judge re-grading the stored episodes. We test this
against the EIA criterion of Section 3.3, which a usable de-inflation signal must satisfy on both
axes (|Corr(ν,b)| small and Corr(V,U) large), and then ask whether the same criterion predicts
correction payoff once the bank is actually modified.
4.1 Verifier candidates
We evaluate six base verifiers on the same Haiku bank, spanning three classes, plus panels. (i) Same
model, no-new-evidence baselines: self-consistency by resampling and an adversarial same-model
judge. (ii) Cross-vendor parametric re-graders from the GPT-5.4 family (nano, mini, largest called
GPT-5.4 without any postfix), which test the intuitive stronger-judge remedy. (iii) A retrieval-based
information verifier that conditions on external evidence rather than parametric re-evaluation, testing
a different evidence channel. We also combine the cross-vendor judges into mean/majority/capability
weighted ensembles and a gold-fit optimal aggregator that upper-bounds any combination. All
verifiers are scored post hoc; Ui is used only to compute the diagnostics Corr(V,U) and Corr(ν,b),
never given to the verifier.
4.2 EIA Experiment
Table 3 reports the result. The same-model baselines fail for different reasons. Self-consistency
is nearly decorrelated from the original bias, but it does not move sufficiently toward truth. The
adversarial same-model judge moves somewhat more toward truth, but its error remains correlated
with the original self-grade bias.
Cross-vendor parametric re-grading also fails, but the failure mode changes with capability. GPT
5.4-nano is roughly decorrelated but not truth-tracking. GPT-5.4-mini becomes more truth-aligned,
but its error is correlated with the original bias. The frontier GPT-5.4 model(the biggest in size) is
weak on both axes: it does not become strongly truth-tracking, and its error stays correlated with
the original bias.
Combining the parametric judges into a panel did not help on this bank. A mean, majority, or
capability-weighted vote inherits their shared bias: the two strongest judges’ errors are themselves
correlated (Corr(νi,νj) = +0.69), so averaging reduces variance, not bias, leaving Corr(ν,b) = +0.33,
indistinguishable from a single judge. Even the gold-fit optimal aggregator of all three judges (an
upper bound that uses U to combine them) reaches only Corr(V,U) = +0.42 with Corr(ν,b) = +0.30,
still short of the decorrelated channel on both axes; on this bank, unanimous agreement of the
three judges is correct only 21% of the time. Panels of judges that share the generator’s blind spots
therefore have few effective votes [23]: on this bank, capability, count, and aggregation did not
manufacture the decorrelation EIA requires.
11
Verifier
Corr(ν,b) Corr(V,U) failure mode
self-consistency (resample)
adversarial same-model judge
cross-vendor re-grade: GPT-5.4-nano
cross-vendor re-grade: GPT-5.4-mini
cross-vendor re-grade: frontier GPT-5.4
verifier ensemble (nano + mini + frontier, mean)
ensemble, optimal aggregator (upper bound)
retrieval-based information verifier
−0.03
+0.36
+0.11
+0.32
+0.31
+0.33
+0.30
+0.05
+0.10
+0.22
−0.04
+0.18
+0.29
+0.20
+0.42
+0.76
weak truth tracking
error correlated with self-grade
not truth-tracking
error correlated with self-grade
weak on both
shared bias survives averaging
even the best panel of these judges fails
strongly truth-tracking, decorrelated
Table 3: EIA on the live Haiku bank. Parametric re-graders fail via two routes: some are not
truth-tracking, while stronger ones become more truth-aligned but remain error-correlated. The
retrieval-based information verifier is the only tested signal that is strong on both axes: it tracks
truth far more strongly than any parametric judge while keeping its error decorrelated.
In contrast, the retrieval-based information verifier passes both conditions: its error is weakly
correlated with the self-grade bias and its score strongly tracks truth. This is the only verifier in the
tested set that satisfies EIA.
EIA is a property whose passing class also contains the genuinely answer-free, imperfect BIRD
signal (precision ρ=0.90, Section 6.3), and Proposition 2 ties the recoverable payoff to a verifier’s two
correlations for any signal, so the table establishes a contrast (parametric re-graders never reach the
decorrelated region), not a ceiling. The criterion is also genuinely predictive rather than a post-hoc
relabeling: under leave-one-seed-out cross-validation the retrieval channel is the unique EIA-pass on
the training seeds and the rank-one de-inflation signal on the held-out seed in all three folds (mean
PASS-minus-FAIL gap +0.45). Both arguments are developed in Appendix C. The takeaway is that
the useful intervention is not another score from a more capable model but another error channel:
increasing capability raises Corr(V,U) without lowering |Corr(ν,b)|, so a parametric judge sharing
the generator’s blind spots stays unsafe for correcting this bank. The next question is whether this
diagnostic predicts actual correction payoff when the bank is modified.
4.3 De-Inflation Payoff on the Bank
We next ask whether the EIA criterion predicts what happens when we actually de-inflate the bank.
Each verifier drives the same conservative, de-inflation, no overwrite an answer, or re-solve a task
(the full operator is given in Appendix D). Holding the operator fixed makes the comparison across
verifiers turn entirely on signal quality. We score each corrected bank by the change in Corr(Q,U),
estimated by bootstrap; ground truth is used only for this evaluation, never by the verifier.
Correction payoff. Table 4 reports the payoff for each verifier. The retrieval-based information
verifier, the only non-oracle signal that satisfies EIA, produces the largest non-oracle gain, lifting
truth tracking from +0.22 to +0.81 and so recovering most of the oracle ceiling (+0.75). The
parametric LLM re-graders do not provide reliable improvement: GPT-5.4-mini and the adversarial
judge barely move the ranking (+0.03), the frontier GPT-5.4 grader yields only a small gain (+0.10),
GPT-5.4-nano harms the bank (−0.16), and the judge ensemble behaves the same way. The
label-blind global-calibration baseline, by construction, cannot change the ranking at all.
The payoffs track EIA as predicted: the parametric re-graders, however capable, do not substitute
for decorrelation. Importantly, the gain is not a generic memory-pruning effect: against no-generation
12
Audit verifier
before → after
gain
Pr[∆ > 0]
retrieval-based information verifier
oracle gold
frontier GPT-5.4 re-grade
self-consistency
verifier ensemble (mean vote)
adversarial same-model judge
GPT-5.4-mini re-grade
verifier ensemble (majority vote)
GPT-5.4-nano re-grade
+0.22 → +0.81 +0.59
+0.22 → +0.97 +0.75
+0.22 → +0.32 +0.10
+0.22 → +0.28 +0.06
+0.22 → +0.27 +0.05
+0.22 → +0.25 +0.03
+0.22 → +0.25 +0.03
+0.22 → +0.21 −0.01
+0.22 → +0.06 −0.16
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.84
0.81
0.67
0.68
0.46
0.03
global monotone calibration (label-blind)
+0.22 → +0.22 +0.00
Table 4: De-inflation payoff on the live memory bank (pooled over three seeds, n = 300). The
reported quantity is the change in Corr(Q,U) after the demotion-only correction (Appendix D),
with Pr[∆ > 0] from a 2000-sample bootstrap
controls on the same bank, confidence thresholding is a monotone no-op (Lemma 1) and budget
matched random pruning at LUCID’s exact budget harms the bank (−0.16), whereas the decorrelated
de-inflation results in gains +0.59. The effect is thus which memories are de-inflated, not how many;
Appendix D gives the full comparison.
So EIA predicts what can recovers most of the oracle de-inflation payoff, and identifies the
decorrelation property the agent’s deployment signal must share. The next section explains why
global score calibration cannot substitute for this per-memory evidence, and derives the precision
condition under which answer-free de-inflation helps.
5 Why Calibration Fails and When De-Inflation Helps
This section develops the theory in three steps: an elementary lemma on why label-blind global
calibration cannot repair heterogeneous, per-memory inflation (Section 5.1); the paper’s main
theoretical result, a dynamical analysis showing that the write-back loop drives the bank to a
corrupted attractor whose parameters we later measure on BIRD benchmark (Section 5.2). Extended
derivations are in Appendix B.
5.1 Global Calibration Cannot Selectively Correct the Bank
The Echo Gap is heterogeneous: two memories can carry the same self-grade yet differ in correctness,
so a label-blind map that depends only on Qi must treat them identically.
Lemma 1. Let a label-blind global correction have the form Qi = g(Qi). If there exist memories i
and j with Qi = Qj but Ui ̸ = Uj, then no such correction can assign them different corrected utilities,
so global calibration cannot resolve per-memory inflation without memory-specific evidence; as a
special case, a monotone g leaves the top-k retrieved set unchanged. The proof is in Appendix B.
Any correction that does separate two equally-scored memories must therefore read per-memory
evidence, at which point it is precisely the de-inflation signal we study. Empirically (Appendix E,
Table 8), every label-blind monotone map leaves the ranking diagnostics exactly at their raw self
grade values, and even gold-fit maps (Platt, isotonic) a label-free system could not build improve
them only marginally and stay far below the oracle.
13
5.2 Inflation Drives a Corrupted Attractor
Lemma 1 explains why calibration cannot repair the bank, but it is static and does not capture what
makes the Echo Gap dangerous: the bank is not fixed, it is evolving over new tasks. We analyze a
stylized mean-field model of the write-back loop and then measure its parameters on a real agent
(Section G); the value of the model is precisely that its parameters are measurable and its central
prediction is falsifiable.
Let pt ∈ [0,1] be the fraction of trusted (retrievable) memories that are wrong at round t. The
agent solves a new task by conditioning on retrieved memories, with error rate e(p) = min(1, e0+κp),
where e0 is its error rate on an uncorrupted bank (p=0) and κ ≥ 0 is the memory-to-behavior coupling:
how strongly retrieving corrupted memory degrades behavior. A wrong episode enters the trusted set
with the grader’s leniency ℓ = Pr[r=1 | U=0], a correct one with its sensitivity s = Pr[r=1 | U=1],
and the trusted bank relaxes toward the composition of its inflow, q(p) = e(p)ℓ
e(p)ℓ+(1−e(p))s.
Theorem 2 (Corrupted attractor). In the model above:
(i) (Compounding.) The loop admits a fixed point p⋆ solving κ(ℓ−s)p2+e0(ℓ−s)+s−κℓ p−e0ℓ =
0; for κ > 0 it strictly exceeds the one-shot corruption p⋆
0 = e0ℓ
e0ℓ+(1−e0)s that inflation produces
with no feedback.
(ii) (Stability.) The benign fixed point is locally stable iff q′(p⋆) =
κℓs
e⋆(ℓ − s) +s 2 < 1; beyond a
critical coupling κ⋆(ℓ,s) it loses stability and the loop is driven toward the fully-corrupted state
p⋆ = 1.
The proof is in Appendix B. Part (i) is the precise sense in which inflation compounds rather
than averaging out: feedback (κ > 0) lifts the steady-state corruption above the one-shot value,
so the bank is more corrupted than the grader’s leniency alone would imply. Part (ii) identifies a
coupling threshold beyond which the benign regime ceases to exist. Section G measures κ,ℓ,s on
BIRD, confirms that the predicted attractor matches the observed bank, and delimits which of these
regimes the real agent occupies.
Both theorems are minimal mechanism models, chosen so their parameters are measurable and
their central prediction is falsifiable; the empirical test is of the prediction, not of the softmax,
mean-field, or linear-dose idealizations, and the conclusions (inflation compounds, demotion helps
by lowering exposure) require only κ > 0 and monotonicity, both measured. Appendix E discusses
these in depth and demonestrate that why relaxing it does not overturn the conclusions.
5.3 Precision Governs Answer-Free De-Inflation
De-inflation has two requirements. First, its signal must be decorrelated (EIA required). Second,
because de-inflation acts only when a detector flags an episode as likely harmful , the flagged set
must be precise enough.
Let ρ = Pr[Ui = 0 | flagged] denote detector precision on the flagged set. Let gr > 0 be the
expected gain from de-inflating a truly harmful flagged memory, and let hr > 0 be the expected loss
from mistakenly de-inflating a useful memory. The expected effect is given by Equation (18),
∆repair = ρgr − (1 −ρ)hr.
(18)
14
Proposition 1. Suppose de-inflation acts only on flagged episodes. If false flagging a truly wrong
flagged memory yields expected gain gr > 0, and mistakenly flagged useful memory yields expected
loss hr > 0, then, by Equation (19), de-inflation is beneficial in expectation whenever
ρ >ρ⋆ := hr
gr +hr
.
(19)
The threshold follows by requiring the expected de-inflation effect ρgr − (1 − ρ)hr to be positive;
the derivation is given in Appendix B. The answer-free signal we deploy satisfies both conditions: it
is decorrelated from the self-grade (EIA) and, as we show, flags inflated memories with precision
well above the threshold. The end-to-end BIRD experiment tests it directly.
6 End-to-End Experiment
This section tests whether the same mechanism has an observable behavioral consequence in a full
agentic loop. the test is whether the self-grade’s reward inflation measurably degrades a realistic
memory agent, and whether an answer-free de-inflation of the self-grade can results in performance
gain.
6.1 Benchmark and agent loop
We evaluate on the full BIRD text-to-SQL development set: 1,534 questions over real SQLite
databases. Performance is measured with BIRD’s official execution accuracy (EX): the predicted
SQL and reference SQL are executed, and their result sets are compared.
The agent implements a faithful Memento-style memory agent, with identical hyperparameters
across each algorithm for a fair comparison. For each new question, it retrieves the top-k=4 most
similar past episodes with the same SimCSE encoder as the original Memento research paper
(Section 3.4). It then conditions a planner on the retrieved episodes and produces a plan, and an
executor turns that plan into a single SQL query. After producing the SQL, then the episode is
graded without access to the reference answer, and the episode is written back into memory. Within
each seed, all arms see the same task ordering. All roles (planner, executor, and self-grader) use
the same model. Full reproducibility details (hyperparameters, sandboxing, caching, cost, and the
released artifacts) are in Appendix F.
6.2 Experiments
We compare three algorithms under an identical task stream, retrieval depth, prompts, and scorer.
The first is our Memento implementation: a faithful re-implementation of the Memento loop, left
unchanged. It retrieves memories, conditions a planner on them, generates SQL, grades the result,
and writes the episode back into memory for later use.
The second algorithm is LUCID, our answer-free de-inflation. It is the identical Memento agent
(same planner, executor, retriever, prompts, and task order) and differs only in the stored reward:
LUCID de-inflate the memories flagged by the answer-free signal (Section 6.3). LUCID also never
overwrites a memory’s content or re-solves the task using additional LLM generation. The third
algorithm is a no-memory control: the identical architecture so the agent works from the given task
alone.
15
6.3 Answer-free de-inflation signal
The de-inflation detector reads only the candidate’s own inputs and behavior (the question, the
SQL it produced, and how that SQL executes) and never a reference query or a gold result. For
text-to-SQL we instantiate it with three cheap channels: (i) execution, when the query errors, times
out, or returns non-deterministic results across identical runs; (ii) degeneracy, when it executes
but returns an empty or all-NULL result for a question that expects an answer; and (iii) literal
grounding, when it filters on an entity-like string literal that does not appear in the question, a direct
fingerprint of a value copied from a different, wrongly trusted memory. These three channels are
not specific to SQL; they instantiate a general class of answer-free signals available in most agentic
loops, where a stored episode can be checked against real world available signals without the gold
answer (Appendix A lists illustrative examples in other domains). The precision and recall of this
signal on the self-graded bank are reported in Appendix F.
6.4 Main result
Table 5 reports the end-to-end results across two seeds (seed 0 and seed 1). Across both seeds
no-memory agent reached (mean 52.4%), Memento algorithm reached (mean 54.0%). and LUCID
algorithm reached a mean 56.9%. The no-memory agnet never queries memory, so it is order-invariant
and identical across seeds. Per-seed 95% confidence intervals for the paired LUCID−naive difference
exclude zero (+1.9 [+0.2,+3.6] in seed 0; +3.9 [+2.1,+5.6] in seed 1.
Removing the memory inflation thus causally raises accuracy, the de-inflation counterpart of
an inflation-injection experiment, and the within-stratum dose-response of Section G, where the
coupling κ stays positive inside every difficulty band, rules out the natural confound that harder
questions both retrieve worse memory and are independently harder to solve.
Pass@1 (EX)
Arm
Seed 0 Seed 1 Mean
no-memory control
naive self-graded memory
52.4% 52.4% 52.4%
53.8% 54.2% 54.0%
LUCID (answer-free de-inflation) 55.7% 58.1% 56.9%
Table 5: End-to-end results on the full BIRD text-to-SQL development set (official execution accuracy,
EX).
6.5 Validating the dynamical model on the agent
The BIRD traces let us measure the parameters of Theorem 2 directly and test its central prediction.
Agent error rises monotonically with the corruption of the retrieved set (slope κ ≈ 0.38, positive
within every difficulty stratum), the direct empirical realization of the trust channel of Theorem 1(ii):
retrieval here is similarity-only (Aret=1), so κ > 0 isolates the planner trusting inflated memories
more. Plugging the independently measured (κ,ℓ,s,e0) = (0.38,0.76,0.90,0.32) into the theorem
predicts a corrupted attractor p⋆=0.45, which matches the observed trusted-bank corruption (0.42,
within 0.03), whereas a static no-loop account underpredicts it (0.28): the compounding is real and
quantified (1.6× the one-shot value). The measured κ places BIRD in the model’s stable regime. A
generation-free retrieval-depth sweep confirms the inflation is a property of the grader, not of k. Full
measurements, the depth sweep, and the dose-response figure are in Appendix G.
16
7 Conclusion
Self-improving LLM agents that learn from external memory are not only retrieval systems but
reward-sensitive ones: stored scores determine how past episodes are reused, trusted, and reinforced.
When those scores are self-graded, wrong answers can be assigned an inflated utility, and when that
inflation couples to reuse, a feedback loop in which overvalued errors are repeatedly surfaced as
useful precedents. We showed the Echo Gap on live factual banks across model families, proved that
correcting it requires a signal that both tracks truth and avoids echoing the self-grade bias (the
EIA), and demonstrated on BIRD text-to-SQL that an answer-free de-inflation algorithm LUCID,
using only deployment-available evidence, consistently outperform other baselines.
The broader lesson is that label-free memory improvement requires evidence whose failure mode
differs from the agent’s own: a stronger self-evaluator may improve average judgments yet preserve
the bias that distorted the bank. Safer self-improving agents should separate memory writing from
memory trust, audit stored episodes with decorrelated, answer-free evidence, and de-inflate the
memories that influence the agent behavior for future tasks.
A Terminology: Label-Free, Gold-Free, and Answer-Free
We use three related terms carefully.
A label-free memory loop is one in which the ground-truth utility Ui is unavailable when the
memory is written. This is the deployment regime: the agent must decide what to store and trust
before the correct outcome is known.
A gold-free signal is any signal computed without reading Ui. It may still use deployment
available evidence such as retrieved documents, program execution, schema constraints, format
checks, invariants, or consistency tests.
An answer-free de-inflation signal is a stronger kind of gold-free signal: it detects likely wrongness
without reading the reference answer or target output. Examples include execution failure, parse
failure, type or schema violation, degenerate output, violated invariants, or metamorphic inconsistency
under input-preserving rewrites.
Such signals are imperfect by design. They often have low recall, because many wrong outputs
do not crash, violate a schema, or disagree with an alternative path in an obvious way. Low recall is
not fatal for de-inflation. What matters is whether the flagged subset is precise enough to satisfy
the threshold, and whether the signal’s errors are decorrelated from the self-grade bias.
Agent domain Example answer-free signals (no gold answer)
research agent schema/format validity; citation resolves & supports; cross-source agreement
text-to-SQL
executes (no error/timeout); non-degenerate (non-empty, non-NULL); literal grounding
code agent
math / proof
compiles; runs; type-checks; property/metamorphic tests; no invariant violated
checker/lint; unit/dimension consistency; cross-path agreement
tool use / API well-formed output against the contract; idempotent on repeat
Table 6: The answer-free de-inflation signal is domain-general.
B Proofs and Derivations
Proof of Theorem 1. (i) Retrieval channel. With τ flat and π(i) ∝ eQi/T, the honest bank
places wrong memories at Q=0 and correct memories at Q=1, so the reuse-weighted error mass is
17
W+Re1/T 
. The inflated bank raises wrong memories to Q=b, giving Minfl ∝ Web/T
Mhon ∝ W
Dividing yields the stated closed form for Aret. Because b ≥ 0, the factor W+Re1/T
Web/T+Re1/T 
.
Web/T+Re1/T 
∈ (0,1], so
Aret ≤ eb/T; and Aret ≥ 1 because raising wrong-memory scores can only increase their share of
the (monotone, normalized) softmax mass. As W ≪ Re1/T, both correction factors tend to 1 and
Aret → eb/T. Under reward-blind retrieval π(i) does not depend on Qi, hence not on b, so the masses
coincide and Aret = 1. For heterogeneous inflation, replacing each wrong memory’s factor eb/T by
ebi/T ≤ ebmax/T preserves the same upper bound.
(ii) Trust channel. Now let π(i) be independent of the stored score (similarity-only retrieval), so
the retrieval probabilities π(i) of any fixed wrong memory are identical in the honest and inflated
banks. Influence is infl(i) = π(i)τ(Qi), so the reuse-weighted error mass over wrong memories is
M= i:Ui=0π(i)τ(Qi). The honest bank scores every wrong memory at Q=0 and the inflated bank
at Q=b, hence
Atr = Minfl
Mhon 
= i:Ui=0π(i)τ(b)
i:Ui=0 π(i)τ(0) = τ(b)
τ(0) .
Since τ is non-decreasing and b ≥ 0, Atr ≥ 1, with strict inequality whenever τ is strictly increasing
on {0,b} and b > 0. When retrieval probabilities and trust both depend on the score, the masses
multiply and A = AretAtr.
□
Proof of Theorem 2. (i) A fixed point satisfies p = q(p) = eℓ
eℓ+(1−e)s with e = e0 + κp. Writing
D=eℓ+(1−e)s =e(ℓ−s)+s and clearing the denominator, pD = eℓ, i.e. p(e0+κp)(ℓ−s)+s =
(e0 + κp)ℓ, which rearranges to κ(ℓ − s)p2 + e0(ℓ − s) + s −κℓ p−e0ℓ = 0. At κ = 0 this gives
p⋆
0 = e0ℓ
e0ℓ+(1−e0)s. Because e(p) is increasing in p and q is increasing in e (∂q/∂e = ℓs/D2 > 0), the
map q(·) is increasing, so for κ > 0 the fixed point satisfies p⋆ = q(p⋆) > p⋆
0. (ii) The iteration
pt+1 = q(pt) is locally stable at p⋆ iff |q′(p⋆)| < 1. By the chain rule q′(p) = ∂q
∂e e′(p) = ℓs
D2 
κ, giving
the stated condition. As κ grows, q′(p⋆) increases past 1; beyond the resulting κ⋆(ℓ,s) the interior
fixed point is unstable and the iteration is driven to the boundary p = 1 (where e = 1 and q(1) = 1).
Proof of Lemma 1. Because the correction depends only on Qi, equal stored scores imply equal
corrected scores: if Qi = Qj then Qi = g(Qi) = g(Qj) = Qj. If the two memories have different
ground-truth utilities, any correction that treats them identically fails to separate them, so no
label-blind global map can selectively demote the wrong memory while preserving the useful one; a
successful repair must condition on information beyond the original stored score. For the special case
of score-ranked retrieval: if g is strictly increasing then Qi > Qj ⇔ g(Qi) > g(Qj), so the induced
order, and hence the top-k set, is unchanged; if g is only non-decreasing, a fixed tie-breaking rule
independent of g resolves any collapsed ties consistently, again leaving the deterministic top-k set
unchanged. Monotone global calibration therefore cannot remove a wrong memory from the top-k
set unless some memory-specific signal changes the relative order.
Derivation of Proposition 1. The expected repair effect on the flagged set is given by Equa
tion (20),
∆repair = ρgr − (1 −ρ)hr.
Repair is beneficial when ∆repair > 0, which by Equation (21) gives
ρgr −(1−ρ)hr > 0 ⇐⇒ ρgr >(1−ρ)hr ⇐⇒ ρ(gr+hr)>hr ⇐⇒ ρ> hr
(20)
gr +hr
. (21)
18
Thus, de-inflation can be beneficial even if the detector misses many harmful episodes, provided that
the episodes it does flag are harmful with sufficiently high probability.
Proof of Proposition 2. Write ν = βb+η with β = Cov(ν,b)/Var(b) and Cov(η,b) = 0. The
corrected bias is b′ = (1−α)b+αν = (1−α)b+α(βb+η) = 1−α(1−β) b+αη. Since Cov(b,η) = 0,
Var(b′) = 1−α(1−β) 2Var(b)+α2Var(η),
which is Equation (11). (a) If β ≥ 1 then 1−β ≤ 0, so for α ∈ (0,1] the coefficient 1−α(1−β) =
1 +α(β −1) ≥ 1; hence the first term is ≥ Var(b) and the second is strictly positive (whenever
Var(η) > 0), giving Var(b′) > Var(b). (b) Minimizing the quadratic Var(b′) over α gives the stationary
point α⋆ =
(1 −β)Var(b)
(1 −β)2Var(b) +Var(η) (clamped to [0,1]); substituting yields
Var(b) − Var(b′) α⋆ 
=
(1 −β)2Var(b)2
(1 −β)2Var(b) +Var(η) ,
which is Equation (12). It increases as β → 0 and as Var(η) → 0, and at β=0, Var(η)=0 (i.e. V=U)
equals Var(b), removing all inflation.
B.1 Answer-Free De-Inflation and the Precision Threshold
□
The de-inflation objective is to reduce the effective mass of wrong-but-trusted memories and its
flagged set must be precise. This subsection formalizes the precision condition.
Why precision, not just decorrelation. EIA ensures the de-inflation signal does not merely
echo the inflation it was meant to remove. But because de-inflation acts only on a flagged subset,
demoting the stored reward of a flagged memory (from 1 to 0) and never overwriting its content or
re-solving the task, a second quantity matters: the precision of the flagged set. A detector that is
decorrelated on average can still hurt if the specific episodes it flags are mostly fine.
A precision condition for beneficial de-inflation. Let ρ denote the precision of the detector
on the flagged set, as in Equation (22):
ρ = Pr[Ui = 0 | flagged].
(22)
Here, Ui = 0 means that the episode is genuinely harmful or wrong for the purpose of reuse. Let
gr > 0 be the expected gain from repairing a truly harmful flagged episode, and let hr > 0 be the
expected loss from mistakenly repairing a useful episode. Then the expected effect of repair on a
flagged episode is given by Equation (23),
∆repair = ρgr − (1 −ρ)hr.
Repair is beneficial when ∆repair > 0, which gives the threshold in Equation (24),
ρ >ρ⋆ := hr
gr +hr
.
This is Proposition 1 (Section 5.3), derived in Appendix B.
(23)
(24)
The condition is intentionally precision-based rather than recall-based. A low-recall detector may
leave many bad memories untouched, but it can still improve the agent if the subset it does flag is
sufficiently enriched for harmful episodes. This is why precision, not recall, governs de-inflation.
19
Answer-free signals. The detector used for de-inflation need not observe the reference answer.
These signals are imperfect. They may have low recall, because many wrong outputs do not trigger
any obvious failure. However, low recall is not fatal for de-inflation. The precision threshold shows
that a detector can still help if the subset it flags is sufficiently enriched for harmful episodes.
EIA and precision are complementary. The two conditions act at different levels. EIA is a
property of the signal: its errors must be decorrelated from the self-grade bias, or demotion echoes
the inflation it was meant to remove. Precision is a property of the flagged set: the episodes actually
demoted must be wrong often enough to clear the threshold.
C Extended Discussion of EIA
This appendix collects material supporting the EIA criterion of Section 3.3 and the verifier experiment
of Section 4.2.
A constructive sufficient condition for EIA. EIA is not only checkable offline; it admits a
constructive sufficient condition that shows decorrelation can be designed for rather than merely
hoped for. The self-grade ri is a function of the generator’s internal computation Zi (its parametric
beliefs about the task), so its error bi = ri − Ui is Zi-measurable. If the verifier reads a channel Wi
that is conditionally independent of that computation given the ground truth, Wi ⊥ Zi | Ui, then
νi = Vi−Ui is Wi-measurable and Cov(νi,bi | Ui) = 0, so |Corr(ν,b)| is bounded by the truth-induced
component alone. The retrieval channel attains Corr(ν,b) = +0.05 (Table 3). Its value is explanatory:
it identifies why a different information channel tends to satisfy EIA, whereas parametric re-graders
(stronger models, different families, or ensembles) reuse Z-correlated computation and do not.
On the status of EIA. the choice of thresholds τdec,τtru is not load-bearing. Proposition 2 makes
the property EIA names, low error correlation and high truth tracking, a necessary condition for
de-inflation to help; what is directional is only the binary cutoff drawn on that property, not the
property itself. The pass/fail threshold is a diagnostic convenience whose role is to summarize which
signal recovers the de-inflation payoff, and the empirical separation is wide rather than marginal.
The channel we use sits at |Corr(ν,b)|=0.05, Corr(V,U)=0.76, whereas every parametric signal that
tracks truth at all (Corr(V,U)>0) has |Corr(ν,b)| ≥ 0.30 and Corr(V,U) ≤ 0.42 (Table 3). Any
cutoff inside that gap induces the same pass/fail partition, so the conclusion does not hinge on
a particular τ. The actual go/no-go quantity is not τ but the precision threshold ρ⋆=hr/(gr+hr)
(Section 3.3), which is derived from the de-inflation gain/loss trade-off rather than chosen. The
constructive condition W ⊥ Z | U is an explanatory design heuristic (it explains why reading a
different information channel tends to decorrelate the error), not a guarantee assumed here. the
paper never claims it holds exactly but measures the residual error correlation (Corr(ν,b)=0.05), and
because de-inflation acts only through the flagged set, Proposition 1 shows that a mildly correlated
signal still helps as long as its flags clear ρ⋆.
The criterion does not rest on a near-oracle verifier. EIA is a property, and its passing
class is not limited to near-oracles: the genuinely answer-free signal deployed end-to-end on BIRD
(Section 6.3) is decorrelated from the self-grade by construction (it reads program behavior, not
parameters), yet is realistically imperfect, flagging wrong memories at precision ρ=0.90 rather than
near-1.0. That signal is the one the deployment claim rests on. Also Proposition 2 shows EIA governs
20
the recoverable payoff for any verifier through its two correlations, so the criterion is meaningful
independently of whether any single tested verifier happens to be strong.
EIA is a predictive selection criterion, not a restatement. Because EIA (“a verifier helps
when it tracks truth and decorrelates from the bias”) is close to a definition of a good verifier, it
could in principle merely re-describe, after the fact, which signal happened to work on this bank.
We test it as a genuine out-of-sample predictor by leave-one-seed-out cross-validation over the three
banks (n=100 each): EIA is evaluated only on two training seeds to make a pass/fail selection,
and the de-inflation payoff (Section 4.3) is then measured on the held-out seed. The selection is
stable and predictive: the retrieval channel is the unique EIA-pass on the training seeds in all three
folds, and on the held-out seed it is the rank-one de-inflation signal in all three folds, with a mean
PASS-minus-FAIL payoff gap of +0.45. The partition is threshold-independent: the passing channel’s
EIA margin (Corr(V,U) −|Corr(ν,b)| = +0.71) is an order of magnitude above the next signal’s
(+0.06), so any cutoff inside that gap induces the same split. We do not claim that EIA finely ranks
the failing signals out-of-sample; their payoffs are statistically indistinguishable from zero, so their
relative order is noise, and the operative output of EIA is a binary selection of which signal to deploy,
not a fine ranking.
D Generic Memory Filtering
LUCID versus generic memory filtering. The decisive test of whether LUCID is more than
a memory-management heuristic is how it compares to the memory-pruning family on the same
bank (Table 7; pooled three-seed bank, 144 trusted (r=1) memories of which only 15 are genuinely
correct). Confidence (self-grade) thresholding is a monotone no-op (Lemma 1). Self-consistency
(uncertainty) pruning demotes the 81 trusted memories it flags as uncertain and recovers only +0.06
(far below LUCID) while still demoting correct memories, consistent with its weak truth-tracking
in Table 3. The sharpest control is budget-matched random pruning: at LUCID’s exact budget
(K=123), random pruning harms the bank (−0.16) because it demotes 13 of the 15 correct memories,
whereas LUCID demotes the same number of memories with zero collateral and gains +0.59. The
gain is therefore attributable to which memories are demoted, the decorrelated selection, not to
how many. LUCID dominates random pruning at every budget tested (at 25/50/75/100% of K:
+0.06/ +0.13/ +0.26/+0.59 versus −0.04/−0.08/−0.11/−0.16), so it is not an artifact of the
budget choice. Two cost-matched baselines that add no LLM generation also fail to de-inflate:
clipping the retrieval similarity floor leaves Corr(Q,U) ≤ +0.20 across floors (it acts on relevance,
not reward), and confidence thresholding is the monotone no-op above; every effective alternative
instead adds per-memory generation (a judge, a panel, or resampling) yet fails EIA on this bank.
The small base of correct memories here (15) also makes the “0 demoted” figure a low-count estimate,
and we read it accordingly.
Memory-filtering rule
confidence / self-grade threshold
uncertainty prune (self-consistency)
random prune (matched budget)
LUCID (answer-free, decorrelated)
demoted ∆Corr(Q,U) correct demoted (of 15)
0
81
123
123
+0.00
+0.06
−0.16
+0.59
0 (monotone no-op)
4
≈13
0
Table 7: LUCID versus generic memory filtering on the pooled three-seed bank (n=300); 144 trusted
memories, of which only 15 are genuinely correct.
21
E Global Calibration Evidence and Modeling Assumptions
Global calibration cannot repair the bank. Table 8 confirms Lemma 1 on a focused SimpleQA
factual bank (N=50), reporting three rank-based ranking diagnostics: Spearman ρ(Q,U), AUC,
and the top-10 gold rate. Because a monotone map preserves the retrieval order, every label-blind
map (mean-subtraction, z-scoring, min–max rescaling, temperature scaling, sigmoid squash) leaves
all three diagnostics exactly at their raw self-grade values (ρ= − 0.08, AUC=0.41, top-10 gold
=0.00), independent of the specific parameter settings, which are therefore not tuned. Even gold-fit
maps (Platt logistic, isotonic regression), which a label-free deployment could not construct because
they require the unavailable labels, improve the ranking only marginally (ρ to +0.08 and +0.10
respectively, against +1.00 for the oracle) and isotonic still retrieves zero gold memories in its
top-10, exactly as Lemma 1 predicts: a score-only map cannot separate equal-scored memories of
differing correctness. These rank-based metrics are on a separate, smaller bank and are not directly
comparable to the Pearson Corr(Q,U) payoff on the larger bank in Table 4.
Score map
Spearman ρ(Q,U) AUC top-10 gold
raw self-grade (identity)
+ mean-subtract / z-score / min–max
+ temperature (T=2) / sigmoid
−0.08
−0.08
−0.08
0.41
0.41
0.41
0.00
0.00
0.00
Platt logistic (gold-fit)
isotonic (gold-fit)
+0.08
+0.10
0.59
0.60
0.10
0.00
oracle (true utility)
+1.00
1.00
0.40
Table 8: Ranking diagnostics under global score calibration. Rows group the identity (raw self-grade)
and label-blind monotone maps (which share one row of values), gold-fit maps (Platt, isotonic), and
the oracle. Columns: Spearman ρ(Q,U), AUC, and the top-10 gold rate.
F BIRD Reproducibility, Hyperparameters, and Detector Precision
Models and availability. All models used in this paper are publicly available production models,
and we pin fixed versions so the experiments reproduce against the same snapshots. The answering
and self-grading agent for the factual banks is Anthropic Claude Haiku 4.5 (claude-haiku-4-5
20251001). The cross-vendor re-graders are the OpenAI GPT-5.4 family: gpt-5.4-nano-2026-03-17,
gpt-5.4-mini-2026-03-17, and the frontier gpt-5.4-2026-03-05. Retrieval uses the rinceton-nlp/sup
simcse-bert-base-uncased SimCSE sentence encoder, the same retriever as Memento [4, 37].
Reproducibility and hyperparameters. The three baseline algorithms share a single config
uration; only the stored reward differs. Retrieval ranks the top-k=4 neighbors by SimCSE cosine
similarity alone (Memento-faithful, so stored labels are shown to the planner but never used to re
rank) and tags cases drawn from the same database. The case memory is unbounded and append-only:
every episode is written back, so the bank grows across the run to the full task stream (up to 1,534
episodes). Each candidate query runs in an isolated sandbox with a 30-second timeout and is executed
twice to detect nondeterminism. The reference query is executed only to compute official EX and is
never visible to the agent. Two seeds (0 and 1) are reported, and each seed fixes one task permutation
shared by all algorithms. The end-to-end study spans three algorithms × two seeds × 1,534 episodes,
and each episode issues three model calls (planner, executor, self-grader). The answer-free de-inflation
22
signal makes no model call, so LUCID and the Memento agent baseline incur identical per-episode
generation cost. This is on the order of 2.8×104 generation calls for the full evaluation, and fewer in
practice because content-addressed caching replays the shared prefix at zero cost. SimCSE embedding
is cheap relative to generation, and sandboxed SQL execution, not model inference, dominates
wall-clock. All code, per-episode memory traces, exact run configurations, and result files are released
at https://github.com/MohammadAsadolahi/Reliable-Memory-Agents-in-the-Wild.
Detector precision and recall. Measured directly on the self-graded bank, this signal flags
wrong memories with precision ρ = 0.90 (pooled, CI [0.875,0.920], n=649 flags) against a base rate
of ≈ 0.46, clearing the break-even threshold ρ⋆=0.5 (Proposition 1) by a wide margin while reading
no reference answer; recall is low but harmless for de-inflation. The per-seed precision and recall
figures follow. The answer-free signal flags wrong memories with precision ρ = 0.93 in each of the
two seeds run in the deployed configuration (95% CIs [0.89,0.96] and [0.87,0.98]; pooled across all
three available banks ρ = 0.90, CI [0.875,0.920], n=649 flags), against a base rate of wrong memories
of ≈ 0.46.
G Measuring the Loop on the Real Agent
Theorem 2 predicts a corrupted attractor, but only if its parameters are real. The BIRD traces allow
them to be estimated directly and the model’s central prediction to be tested against the observed
bank.
The memory-to-behavior coupling is measurable and positive. For each query we compute
the corruption of its retrieved set (the fraction of retrieved memories that are trusted yet, post hoc,
actually wrong) and relate it to whether the agent then errs. Agent error rises monotonically with
retrieved corruption, from 0.32 when the retrieved set is clean to 0.61 when it is fully corrupted
(Figure 2), an ordinary-least-squares slope of κ ≈ 0.38. The slope stays positive within every
difficulty stratum (κ = 0.32,0.40,0.34 for simple, moderate, and challenging questions), so it is not
an artifact of harder questions both retrieving worse memory and being harder to solve. From the
same run, the self-grader has leniency ℓ = 0.76 and sensitivity s = 0.90, and the uncorrupted-bank
error is e0 = 0.32. This positive coupling is the direct empirical realization of the trust channel
of Theorem 1(ii): because retrieval here is similarity-only (Aret=1), the harm of wrong memories
cannot come from score-ranked retrieval mass, so κ > 0 isolates the effect of the planner trusting
inflated memories more, i.e. Atr = τ(1)/τ(0) > 1 realized as a measured slope rather than assumed.
The predicted attractor matches the observed bank. Substituting these independently
measured values into Theorem 2 yields a closed-loop corrupted attractor p⋆ = 0.45. The observed
corruption of the trusted bank, the fraction of self-graded-correct memories that are in fact wrong,
is 0.42, within 0.03 of the prediction, and the corruption trajectory rises over the task stream before
settling near this value. A static account that ignores the loop underpredicts the corruption at
0.28; it is the dynamical term that reconciles prediction with observation, and the compounding it
describes is real and quantified (the attractor is 1.6× the one-shot value).
Scope of the dynamical claim. The measured κ = 0.38 places BIRD firmly in the model’s stable
regime: corruption is bounded but materially elevated, and the loop does not collapse. Theorem 2(ii)
predicts that agents with stronger memory dependence (larger κ) would cross the stability threshold.
23
Figure 2: Measuring the memory-to-behavior coupling on BIRD. Agent error rate rises monotonically
with the corruption of the retrieved memory set (left), with slope κ ≈ 0.38 that persists within every
difficulty stratum, so the coupling is not a difficulty artifact. Plugging the measured (κ,ℓ,s,e0)
into Theorem 2 predicts a corrupted attractor p⋆=0.45 that matches the observed trusted-bank
corruption 0.42, while the static (no-loop) account underpredicts it at 0.28 (right).
LUCID acts on the complementary lever, by demoting flagged memories it lowers the corruption the
planner is exposed to, shifting retrievals toward the clean end of the dose-response curve in Figure 2.
Sensitivity to retrieval depth. Because re-running generation at every depth would require
new model calls, we probe k-sensitivity generation-free: re-embedding the bank reproduces the
agent’s stored retrieval exactly (1,533/1,533 top-4 sets matched), so at each depth we recompute the
corruption of the retrieved set the planner conditions on and its coupling to behavior. Across k ∈
{1,2,4,8} the retrieved-set corruption is essentially flat (0.36,0.34,0.34,0.34), confirming the inflation
is a property of the grader, not of the depth, while the memory-to-behavior coupling strengthens
monotonically (κ = 0.15,0.22,0.38,0.44) and the clean-bank error falls (e0 = 0.41,0.39,0.33,0.31).
Deeper retrieval therefore helps more when the bank is clean and costs more when it is corrupted.
The error gap between fully-corrupted and clean retrieval widens from +0.15 at k=1 to +0.33
at k=8, all within the model’s stable regime. The deployed k=4 is representative rather than a
favorable choice (its slope is the headline κ=0.38), and the value of de-inflation, if anything, grows
with retrieval depth.
References
[1] Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press,
second edition, 2018.
[2] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
[3] Aman Madaan et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
[4] Huichi Zhou et al. Memento: Fine-tuning LLM agents without fine-tuning LLMs. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.16153, 2025.
24
[5] Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom B. Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei.
Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.
[6] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin,
Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton,
Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano,
Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
[7] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-Bench and chatbot arena. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023. arXiv:2306.05685.
[8] Jane Pan, He He, Samuel R. Bowman, and Shi Feng. Spontaneous reward hacking in iterative
self-refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04549, 2024.
[9] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan
Cao. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
[10] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi,
Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
[11] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman
Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and
Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
[12] Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
Michael S. Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST), 2023.
[13] Siru Ouyang, Jun Yan, I-Hung Hsu, Yanfei Chen, Ke Jiang, et al. ReasoningBank: Scaling
agent self-evolving with reasoning memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25140, 2025.
[14] Shengtao Zhang, Jiaqian Wang, Ruiwen Zhou, et al. MemRL: Self-evolving agents via runtime
reinforcement learning on episodic memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03192, 2026.
[15] Sikuan Yan, Xiufeng Yang, Zuchao Huang, et al. Memory-R1: Enhancing large language
model agents to manage and utilize memories via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.19828, 2025.
[16] Yu Wang, Ryuichi Takanobu, Zhiqi Liang, et al. Mem-α: Learning memory construction via
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25911, 2025.
[17] Yi Yu, Liuyi Yao, Yuexiang Xie, et al. Agentic memory: Learning unified long-term and short
term memory management for large language model agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.01885,
2026.
25
[18] Mehmet Iscan. Learning when to remember: Risk-sensitive contextual bandits for abstention
aware memory retrieval in LLM-based coding agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.27283, 2026.
[19] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in
language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
arXiv:2203.11171.
[20] Muhammad Khalifa et al. Process reward models that think. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16828,
2025.
[21] Koki Wataoka, Tsubasa Takahashi, and Ryokan Ri. Self-preference bias in LLM-as-a-judge.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21819, 2024.
[22] Zhi-Yuan Chen et al. Beyond the surface: Measuring self-preference in LLM judgments. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2506.02592, 2025.
[23] Anonymous. Nine judges, two effective votes: Correlated errors undermine LLM evaluation
panels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.29800, 2026.
[24] Koen Claessen and John Hughes. QuickCheck: A lightweight tool for random testing of Haskell
programs. In International Conference on Functional Programming (ICFP), pages 268–279,
2000.
[25] Xuejun Yang, Yang Chen, Eric Eide, and John Regehr. Finding and understanding bugs in C
compilers. In Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), pages 283–294, 2011.
[26] Tsong Yueh Chen, Shing Chi Cheung, and Siu Ming Yiu. Metamorphic testing: A new approach
for generating next test cases. Technical Report HKUST-CS98-01, Department of Computer
Science, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 1998.
[27] Sergio Segura, Gordon Fraser, Ana B. Sanchez, and Antonio Ruiz-Cortés. A survey on
metamorphic testing. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 42(9):805–824, 2016.
[28] Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Anh Nguyen, Daoguang Zan, Zeqi Lin, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu
Chen. CodeT: Code generation with generated tests. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2023. arXiv:2207.10397.
[29] Haoran Xu et al. SEDM: Scalable self-evolving distributed memory for agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.09498, 2025.
[30] Qianshan Wei, Tengchao Yang, Yaochen Wang, et al. A-MemGuard: A proactive defense
framework for LLM-based agent memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.02373, 2025.
[31] Minhua Lin, Zhiwei Zhang, Hanqing Lu, et al. MemMA: Coordinating the memory cycle
through multi-agent reasoning and in-situ self-evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.18718, 2026.
[32] Dylan Zhang et al. Useful memories become faulty when continuously updated by LLMs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2605.12978, 2026.
[33] Jie Huang, Xinyun Chen, Swaroop Mishra, Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Adams Wei Yu, Xinying Song,
and Denny Zhou. Large language models cannot self-correct reasoning yet. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024. arXiv:2310.01798.
26
[34] Ariel Jaffe, Boaz Nadler, and Yuval Kluger. Estimating the accuracies of multiple classifiers
without labeled data. Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2015. arXiv:1407.7644.
[35] Andrés Corrada-Emmanuel. The logic of NTQR evaluations of noisy AI agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.05392, 2023.
[36] Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Ge Qu, Jiaxi Yang, Binhua Li, Bowen Li, et al. Can LLM already
serve as a database interface? a BIg bench for large-scale database grounded text-to-SQLs. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023. arXiv:2305.03111.
[37] Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. SimCSE: Simple contrastive learning of sentence
embeddings. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2021





__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________


SIRIN:AUnifiedToolkitforDetecting Contextual Hallucinations in
Retrieval-Augmented and Memory-Grounded LLM Systems
Julia Belikova Rauf Parchiev Mikhail Filimonov Konstantin Polev
Andrey Savchenko Maksim Makarenko
Sber AI Lab
Abstract
SIRIN (Semantic Inconsistency Recognition
and Inspection Nexus) is a unified toolkit and
interactive web UI for detecting contextual hal
lucinations (fluent, plausible responses unsup
arXiv:2608.00033v1  [cs.AI]  20 Jul 2026
ported by the provided evidence) in retrieval
augmented, agentic, and memory-grounded
LLM systems. SIRIN unifies three detec
tor paradigms (representation probing, uncer
tainty estimation, and judge-style verification)
and the complementary task of pre-generation
query answerability under one interface, con
figuration system, and evaluation pipeline, sup
porting response- and span-level inspection in
both white-box and black-box settings. The
web UI enables live analysis of user-supplied
context–query–answer triples through halluci
nation scores, unsupported-span highlighting,
and side-by-side detector comparison, with a
lightweight plug-in design for adding new de
tectors. We demonstrate SIRIN on hallucina
tion detection, query answerability, and as a
faithfulness gate within long-term memory sys
tems.
The source code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/sb-ai-lab/SIRIN.
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) often produce
answers that are fluent and plausible, yet not
grounded in the evidence they are given (Ji et al.,
2023; Huang et al., 2025). In context-grounded
generation, this failure is usually framed as con
textual hallucination: the model introduces claims
that are unsupported by, or inconsistent with, the
provided context (Niu et al., 2024; Chuang et al.,
2024). Such failures are especially consequen
tial in deployed RAG systems and in agentic
pipelines, where models repeatedly retrieve, sum
marize, store, and update declarative or procedu
ral memory over long-term interaction (Lin et al.,
2025; Liu et al., 2026).
Toolkit
Probe Judge UE Ans. Span UI
LM-Polygraph
∼ ✗ ✓ ✗ ∼ ∼
RAGAS
✗ ✓ ✗ ∼ ∼ ✗
DeepEval ✗ ✓ ✗ ∼ ∼ ✗
UpTrain†
✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ∼ ✓
TruLens ✗ ✓ ✗ ∼ ∼ ✓
LettuceDetect
✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓
SIRIN (this work)
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Table 1: Comparison with representative open-source
evaluation toolkits. Probe = trained probes over model
internals; UE = uncertainty estimation; Ans. = query
answerability; Span = sub-response localization. ✓ =
native support; ∼ = partial support, such as claim- or
statement-level verdicts rather than span offsets, query
context relevance rather than an explicit answerability
decision, density estimators over hidden states rather
than trainable probes, or a deprecated demo UI; ✗ =
absent. †No public development activity in the past two
years.
This need has led to a broad and heterogeneous
landscape of hallucination detectors, which largely
fall into three families. Probing methods train
lightweight classifiers over generator-side signals
such as hidden states, attention maps, and to
ken probabilities, from representation probes to
attention-based methods such as Lookback Lens (Ji
et al., 2024; Chuang et al., 2024). Judge-style
methods rely only on observable inputs and out
puts, using sampled generations, semantic consis
tency checks, encoder-based classifiers, or LLM
as-a-judge verification (Manakul et al., 2023; Es
et al., 2024; Kovács and Recski, 2025; Tam
ber et al., 2025). Uncertainty estimation (UE)
scores generations by the model’s own confidence,
from likelihood-based scores such as perplexity to
sampling-based semantic uncertainty and attention
aware estimators such as RAUQ (Fadeeva et al.,
2023; Farquhar et al., 2024; Vazhentsev et al.,
2026). Two axes cut across the families: the model
access they assume (white-box internals versus
black-box text) and the granularity at which they
1
operate, where response-level scores support run
spans highlighted on the answer, and a side-by-side
time gating while entity- and span-level predictions
are needed for inspection, debugging, and user
facing explanations (Niu et al., 2024; Yeh et al.,
2025; Rykov et al., 2025; Vázquez et al., 2025).
Despite this progress, using these methods in a
single LLM system remains cumbersome: detector
implementations differ in data format, configura
tion style, backend assumptions, supported gran
ularity, and evaluation protocol, which obscures
comparison and complicates combining comple
mentary signals across pipeline stages. Such sig
nals span the whole generation cycle, from pre
generation checks of whether the context is suffi
cient to answer a query (query answerability) to
post-generation checks of whether the produced
answer is faithful to that context. Existing open
source toolkits reflect this fragmentation rather than
resolving it (Table 1). LM-Polygraph (Fadeeva
et al., 2023; Vashurin et al., 2025) offers the most
comprehensive uncertainty-estimation catalog but
provides neither trainable probes nor judge-based
verification. RAGAS (Es et al., 2024), DeepE
val (Ip, 2024), UpTrain (UpTrain AI, 2023), and
TruLens (Snowflake Inc., 2024) primarily rely on
LLM-as-a-judge verification, exposing at most
statement-level verdicts, with no access to gener
ator internals or uncertainty signals. LettuceDe
tect (Kovács and Recski, 2025) instead uses a fine
tuned encoder to predict token-level hallucinated
spans, giving finer localization but still confined
to a single detector regime. To date, no existing
toolkit unifies all three families behind a single
interface that covers both answerability and faith
fulness at response and span granularity, together
with an interactive inspection UI.
We introduce SIRIN (Semantic Inconsistency
Recognition and Inspection Nexus), a toolkit that
addresses this fragmentation by treating contextual
hallucination detection as an infrastructure problem
rather than a single-detector problem. SIRIN pro
vides a common environment for developing new
detectors, inspecting and benchmarking existing
ones, and deploying them in practical LLM sys
tems, from query answerability before generation
to answer faithfulness verification after generation.
The accompanying web UI1 makes this concrete:
a visitor pastes a context–query–answer triple, se
lects detectors from any of the three families, and
sees a calibrated hallucination score, unsupported
1Demo video: https://rebrand.ly/SIRIN
comparison of detector outputs (Figure 2).
The main contributions of this work are:
• SIRIN,aunifiedopen-sourcetoolkitthatbrings
probing-based methods, judge-style verification,
and uncertainty estimation, together with the
complementary task of query answerability, un
der a shared interface, data format, configuration
system, and evaluation pipeline, covering white
box and black-box regimes at response and span
granularity with plug-in extension points for new
detectors. The same detectors could be attached
as a drop-in trust layer around the retrieval stage
of agentic memory modules, gating answers on
both answerability and faithfulness (§4).
• An interactive web interface for practical hal
lucination inspection, including live analysis
of context–query–answer triples, hallucination
scores, unsupported-span visualization, and side
by-side comparison of detector outputs, available
at https://hf.co/spaces/parchiev/SIRIN.
• Anempirical demonstration of SIRIN on con
textual hallucination detection and query answer
ability, together with its integration as a faithful
ness gate in the SimpleMem (Liu et al., 2026)
long-term memory system.
2 SIRIN:AUnifiedToolkit
SIRIN implements faithfulness inspection as a con
figurable pipeline over grounded inputs; Figure 1
gives an overview. Unlike toolkits focused only
on post-generation hallucination detection, SIRIN
supports two complementary tasks: contextual hal
lucination detection, which verifies whether a gen
erated answer is supported by the provided context,
and query answerability, which checks whether the
context is sufficient before generation. Two tasks
share the same interface but differ in their input:
xhall = (c,q,a),
xans = (c,q),
where c is the context, q is the user query, and a is
the model answer. A detector Dθ maps either input
to a standardized inspection report
Dθ(x) = s,ˆy,E ,
where s ∈ [0,1] is a calibrated probability score,
ˆ
y is the predicted label (binary, or ternary in NLI
style setups), and E contains optional evidence
such as span scores, uncertainty values, or judge
rationales. This shared report schema is the core
abstraction of SIRIN: detectors and their ensem
bles can be compared in the Web UI or used as
2
b
SCORE
FEATURES
HIDDEN STATES
TWO TASKS
INPUT TRIPLE
CONTEXT
retrieved
evidence
QUERY
user question
ANSWER
LLM response
ANSWERABILITY
answerable?
✓
generate
HALLUCINATION
supported by context?
FROZEN LLM · ONE PASS
✗ abstain
transformer layer ℓ
extract hₜ
unsupported
TRAINED PROBE
OUTPUT ·
GRANULARITY
unsup.
faithful
Response 
· one score per answer
Classifier
→
→
Linear head
CatBoost
TabPFN
→
0.78
The treaty was signed in
1809.
→
Span 
· one score per span
The treaty was signed
0.78
0.12
answer tokens
in 1809.
one vector per token
at layer ℓ
0.83
faithful
a
Judge
a second model checks the text 
EVIDENCE
“…signed in 
1810
…”
Judge LM 
“does the evidence support this?”
Probing
black-box
ANSWER
“…signed in 
1809
…”
contradiction
what the model already knows
Uncertainty 
white-box
learned boundary
this answer
faithful hallucinated
hesitation leaves traces
confident
 · peaked
answer confidence
hesitant
 · flat
38 estimators →
 common scale →
 fused
entropy
perplexity
SAR
P(True)… 
→
one score
Figure 1: (a) Three detector families: Judge (black-box) uses a second model to check for contradictions between
evidence and answer; Probing (white-box) trains a classifier over hidden-state representations to separate faithful
from hallucinated outputs; Uncertainty fuses 38 estimators (entropy, perplexity, SAR, P(True), etc.) into a single
calibrated score based on generation confidence patterns. (b) The full pipeline on Probing detector example: an
input triple context–query–answer is processed through a frozen LLM in one pass to extract hidden states, which
are transformed into features and scored by a trained probe. Outputs can be at the response level (one score per
answer) or span level (one score per text segment).
runtime gates without changing application code.
Detector families. SIRIN groups detectors into
three families (Figure 1a). Probing detectors train
lightweight classifiers (linear, tabular, or attention
pooling, with optional contrastive objectives) over
frozen internal features (Hewitt and Liang, 2019;
CH-Wang et al., 2024; Kossen et al., 2024; Be
likova et al., 2025; Ji et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2020).
Judge detectors perform text-only semantic ver
ification using encoder, decoder, or API-based
models, covering NLI-style and alignment-style
factuality checks (Kovács and Recski, 2025; Niu
et al., 2024; Zha et al., 2023). Uncertainty detec
tors wrap LM-POLYGRAPH2, exposing likelihood
, sampling-, attention-based, and other uncertainty
estimators. The families differ in the signal they
consume and SIRIN makes these access assump
tions explicit and allows implementation compo
nents to be interchanged.
Anatomy of a detection pass. Figure 1b illus
trates the probing pipeline: the input triple is ren
dered as a chat-formatted sample and processed by
a frozen backend LLM in a single forward pass.
A feature processor extracts the signals; a token
locator selects which positions to read and pools
2https://github.com/IINemo/lm-polygraph
them into fixed-size features; a trained probe then
emits a calibrated score. A composing processor ex
tracts all requested feature families from the same
shared pass, so multi-signal probes cost close to
one model pass instead of one pass per signal. The
same pipeline emits response-level scores for run
time gating or span-level scores for inspection via
a reusable splitter/aggregator, following atomic de
composition (Min et al., 2023), so one configu
ration serves both production gating and UI span
highlighting.
Backends, configuration, and extension.
Model calls are routed through interchange
able backends: Transformers3 for white-box
access to internals, vLLM4 for high-throughput
generation and log-probability scoring, and
OpenAI-compatible endpoints for API-based
black-box judges. Since each detector declares
the signals it requires, the same pipeline runs with
generator internals, with a proxy model when
internals are unavailable, or as text-only verifi
cation through an API. A SIRIN run is a typed,
Hydra5-compatible configuration over backend,
processors, detector, splitter, and aggregation:
3https://github.com/huggingface/transformers
4https://docs.vllm.ai/
5https://hydra.cc/
3
Figure2:SIRIN’sinteractiveWebUI.Avisitorsuppliesacontext–questionpair(orpicksacuratedexample),
selectsadetectorpresetspanningtheprobing,judge,anduncertaintyfamilies,andinspectstheresultsdirectly: the
answerisscoredanditsunsupportedspansarehighlightedwithper-spanrisk,alongsideasummaryofsuspect
spansandmaximumrisk.
switchingtask,detectorfamily,orgranularityis
aconfigurationeditratherthanapipelinerewrite.
Newmethodsenter throughthreeplugpoints: a
featureprocessor, adetector, or anaggregator.
AppendixAgivesfullimplementationdetails.
InteractiveWebUI. TheUI is implemented
directly in Streamlit6 and calls SIRINdetec
torswithin the same process. HuggingFace
andOpenAI-compatiblebackendsprovidegenera
tion.SIRIN’sthread-safemodelmanagerreuses
loadedmodelsandevictsthemwhentheconfigured
model-countorGPU-memorylimitsarereached.
RecordedJSONartifactsprovideaGPU-freere
playpath.
Avisitorpastesacontext–query–answertriple
orpicksonefromacuratedgallerydrawnfrom
RAGTruth (Niuet al., 2024), PsiloQA(Rykov
etal.,2025),andMu-SHROOM(Vázquezetal.,
2025),thenselectsoneofpreloadeddetectorcon
figurationsspanningallthreefamiliesandinspects
theresponse-levelscore,span-levelhighlighting,
per-chunkcontextheat-bar,andside-by-sidecom
paremodedirectlyintheinterface(Figure2).
3 Evaluation
WeevaluateSIRINonresponse-levelhallucination
detection,queryanswerability,andspan-levelhal
lucinationlocalization.Theexperimentscompare
probing, judge,anduncertainty-estimationmeth
odsunderdifferentmodel-accessandannotation
settings.
6https://streamlit.io
Method QA Summary Data-to-Text
AUROC F1 AUROC F1 AUROC F1
Probing
Att.-poolprobe 86.9 60.6 82.8 57.2 85.3 83.6
CatBoostprobe 87.9 56.2 76.5 48.5 85.3 85.0
CatBoostensemble 88.0 53.0 77.7 52.1 84.9 83.3
Judges
ModernBERT-large 80.2 48.9 62.2 27.5 79.6 82.6
DeBERTa-v3-large 81.6 51.4 63.0 14.0 49.0 78.3
Qwen3-4B(ZS) 76.1 43.9 64.2 41.1 79.0 75.1
Qwen3-4B 93.5 71.4 91.8 71.6 93.4 91.0
GPT-5.4-mini(ZS) 88.8 60.0 82.0 57.3 86.8 86.2
Table2:Response-levelcontextualhallucinationdetec
tionacross thethreeRAGTruthtasksplits. Probing
modelsoperateoninternalrepresentationsofQwen3
4B.
Setup. All detectors use the same score-and
calibrationinterfaceanddifferonlyinthesignals
theyconsume.Probingmethodstrainlightweight
classifiers over frozen hidden states; encoder
judgesbasedonModernBERTandDeBERTa-v3
arefine-tunedwithLoRA,andtheQwen3-4Bde
coderjudgeisevaluatedbothzero-shotandafter
LoRAadaptation;GPT-5.4-miniisusedasastrictly
black-boxAPIjudge.Decisionthresholdsarese
lectedonthetrainingsplit tomaximizeF1;span
metricsarecomputedat thecharacter level. Ap
pendixCdetailstheprobefeatures,judgevariants,
andscoringprotocol.
3.1 Response-LevelDetection
RAGTruth. Table 2 reports hallucinationde
tectionresultson thequestion-answering(QA),
summarization, and data-to-text subsets of
RAGTruth(Niuetal.,2024), usingtheoriginal
4
generatedresponsesandexpertannotations.Since
theinternalstatesoftheoriginalgeneratorsareun
available,probingmethodsextractrepresentations
fromQwen3-4Bovertheannotatedsamples.Con
sistentwiththeannotationefficiencyoflightweight
probes(Belikovaetal.,2025), thebestprobeat
tains88.0AUROConQAand85.3ondata-to
text,outperformingtheLoRAfine-tunedencoder
judgesonallthreesubsets(80.2–81.6AUROCon
QA);onsummarization,wheretheencodersdrop
to62.2–63.0AUROC,theattention-poolingprobe
retains82.8.Givensufficientannotations,however,
theLoRA-trainedQwen3-4Bjudgeisuniformly
strongest(91.8–93.5AUROC,71.4–91.0F1),5.5
9.0AUROCpointsabovethebestprobepersubset,
followedbyzero-shotGPT-5.4-mini (82.0–88.8
AUROC).Uncertaintyestimationisnotreported
becauseuncertaintysignalsfromaseparateproxy
modelarepoorlyalignedwiththeuncertaintyof
theoriginalgenerator.
Method HallucinationDetection QuestionAnswerability
AUROC F1 AUROC F1
Probing
Att.-poolprobe 75.3 46.0 87.9 79.5
CatBoostprobe 78.4 52.0 80.2 72.7
CatBoostensemble 74.0 46.7 78.6 71.7
Judges
ModernBERT-large 73.7 32.5 50.0 49.6
DeBERTa-v3-large 77.7 52.4 91.3 84.6
Qwen3-4B(ZS) 63.6 28.6 92.4 78.2
Qwen3-4B 87.0 70.2 95.7 89.2
GPT-5.4-mini(ZS) 84.6 61.0 91.3 83.8
UncertaintyEstimation
MeanTokenEntropy 67.4 39.9 52.0 57.8
RAUQ 58.8 39.8 58.8 51.2
Focus 64.0 39.2 56.9 52.8
CombinedUE 69.0 39.9 57.8 58.6
Table3:Hallucinationdetectionandquestionanswer
abilityonSQuAD2.0.Probinganduncertaintyestima
tionuseinternalsignalsfromQwen3-4B.
SQuAD2.0. Table3evaluateshallucinationde
tectionusingresponsesgeneratedbyQwen3-4B
foraSQuAD2.0subset(Rajpurkaretal.,2018).
Thisallowsprobinganduncertaintymethods to
accesssignalsfromthesamemodelthatproduced
theanswer. Probesprovidealightweight super
visedbaselineofupto78.4AUROC,buttheLoRA
trainedQwen3-4Bjudgeagainperformsbestinthis
annotation-richsetting(87.0AUROC,70.2F1),
withzero-shotGPT-5.4-miniclosebehind(84.6
AUROC).Theuncertaintymethods areweaker
butfullyunsupervised: thethreetop-performing
estimators,MeanTokenEntropy,RAUQ,andFo
cus (Fomichevaet al., 2020;Vazhentsevet al.,
2026;Zhangetal.,2023), reach58.8–67.4AU
ROC,andafusedscore(CombinedUE),which
normalizesandaggregatesthebest-performinges
timatorsonthetrainingsplit,addsonly1.6points
(69.0AUROC).
Weadditionallyevaluatequeryanswerability
using theoriginal SQuAD2.0 labels andonly
thequestionandcontext as input. Thegeneric
ModernBERTencoderfailstotransfer,scoringat
chancelevel(50.0AUROC),whereasDeBERTa-v3
withNLIpretrainingreaches91.3AUROC,within
4.4pointsoftheLoRA-trainedQwen3-4Bjudge
(95.7) andonparwithzero-shotGPT-5.4-mini
(91.3).Thissuggeststhatanswerabilityisclosely
alignedwith textual entailment. Theattention
poolingprobeattains87.9AUROC,demonstrat
ing that the sameSIRINpipelinecansupport
bothpre-generationanswerabilitychecksandpost
generationfaithfulnessverification.
3.2 Span-LevelDetection
Method AUROC AP F1 IoU
Probing
Att.-poolprobe 76.0 65.6 72.5 59.6
CatBoostprobe 75.9 65.4 73.2 61.2
CatBoostensemble 75.9 65.8 72.2 60.3
Judges
ModernBERT-large 74.6 64.5 73.4 63.5
DeBERTa-v3-large 74.4 64.8 73.2 63.2
Qwen3-4B(ZS) 50.0 51.3 0.0 3.7
Qwen3-4B 75.8 68.4 74.8 69.3
GPT-5.4-mini(ZS) 63.8 58.5 72.4 59.6
Table4:Span-levelhallucinationdetectionontheEn
glishsubsetofPsiloQA.ProbingmodelsuseQwen3-4B
internalrepresentations;allmetricsarecharacter-level,
includingAUROC,AP,F1,andmeanper-sampleIoU.
Table4reportscharacter-levelhallucinationlo
calizationontheEnglishsubsetofPsiloQA(Rykov
etal.,2025).Astheoriginalgeneratorinternalsare
unavailable,probingmethodsuseQwen3-4Brep
resentationsextractedfromtheannotatedsamples.
Probesleadinrankingquality(upto76.0AUROC
vs.75.8forthebest judge)andremainattractive
whenspanannotationsarescarce.Withrichersu
pervision,however,theLoRA-trainedQwen3-4B
judgeachievesthestrongestlocalization(74.8F1,
69.3IoU,vs.atmost73.2F1and61.2IoUamong
probes),whilezero-shotspantaggingcollapsesen
tirely.Theseresultsindicatethatproxyprobingis
usefulforannotation-efficientlocalization,whereas
trainedjudgesarepreferablewhenasufficiently
largelabeleddatasetisavailable.
5
Detector Condition Servedaccuracy(%) Strict
unfaith. (%)
Abstain
rate(%)
∆tokens
LLMgen. Single Multi Temporal Overall– Memorybaseline 70.1 58.7 49.6 62.4 20.2 0.0 0%
Oracle Correctness@80%cov.––– 78.0– 20.0 0%
SIRINProbing
+Answerabilitygate 78.4 60.0 63.2 69.9 17.3 21.2 −5.6%
+Faithfulnessgate 78.7 64.4 61.7 71.7 12.9 20.0 0%
+Bothgates 85.0 65.8 70.4 76.8 11.6 33.0 −5.6%
SIRINJudge
+Answerabilitygate 82.5 62.3 64.8 72.5 17.6 21.2 −86.2%
+Faithfulnessgate 71.2 71.7 53.4 68.8 12.1 20.0 0%
+Bothgates 84.5 75.3 69.8 79.3 9.8 35.9 −86.2%
Table5:SIRINasaselective-predictionlayerforSimpleMemonLongMemEval.Qwen3.5-35B-A3Bgeneratesall
answers.SIRINuseseitherprobesoveritshiddenstatesorGPT-5.4-miniasatext-onlyjudge.∆tokensisrelative
totheungatedbaseline,includesgeneratormodelcompletiontokens,andexcludesdetectorinference.
4 TrustworthymemorywithSIRIN
Trustworthy memory with SIRIN
INTERACTION MEMORY
expand retrieval (retry)
memory 
construction
retrieval · top-k
CONTEXT
“Booked the Rosewood
for Oct 3 — expecting 60
guests.”
QUERY
“Where is the
event?”
ANSWER GROUNDED
“At the Rosewood, on
Oct 3.”
SIRIN · memory checks
answerable? ✓ query is covered
hallucinated? · span → evidence
Rosewood →venue ✓
Oct 5 →date = Oct 3 ✗✗
new unit
retrieved unit
MEMORY STORE persistent units
venue date
Figure3:SIRINfortrustworthydynamicmemory.An
swerabilityandspan-levelfaithfulnesschecksvalidate
retrievedevidencebeforereturningananswerortrigger
retrievalexpansiononfailure.
Long-termmemoryturnshallucinationfroman
isolatedmistakeintoacompoundingone:anagent
thatmisreadsitsownmemoryconfidentlycontra
dictsfacts theuser trusts it toremember. Since
everyagenticmemoryframeworkultimatelyserves
aretrievalstagethatemitsevidenceforanswering
aquery,SIRINcanattachatthatstageasadrop-in
trustlayer,withnochangestothememorysystem
itself.
Figure3shows theresultingloop: incoming
messagesaredistilledintomemoryunits,andat
questiontimeSIRINappliestwogatesaroundre
trieval. Theanswerabilitygate(pre-generation)
checkswhether retrievedunitscover thequery,
expandingretrievalonfailure; thehallucination
gate(post-generation)validateseachanswerspan
againstretrievedevidenceandtriggersaretryon
contradictionTogether thegatesgive theagent
threeactions(serve,retry,orabstain)turninghal
lucinationdetectionintoselectiveprediction.
WeinstantiatethisdesigninSimpleMem(Liu
etal.,2026)andevaluateitonLongMemEvalus
inglightweightattention-poolingprobesoverthe
generator’shiddenstatesandGPT-5.4-miniasa
text-onlyjudge(Table5).Combininganswerability
andfaithfulnesschecksraisesaccuracyonserved
answersfromthe62.4%ungatedbaselineto79.3%
whilereducingstrictunfaithfulness from20.2%
to9.8%. ThisdemonstratesthatSIRINcanpro
videaneffectivetrustlayerformemory-grounded
agents.AppendicesEandDextendthistomemory
systemsMem0(Chhikaraetal.,2025)andLight
Mem(Fangetal.,2026).
5 Conclusion
Contextualhallucinationdetectionisaninfrastruc
tureproblem,notasingle-detectorproblem,and
SIRINtreatsitthatway:probing,judge-style,and
uncertainty-estimationdetectors,togetherwithpre
generationqueryanswerability,shareoneinterface,
onereportschema,andawebUIwheretheycan
be inspectedandcomparedlive. Thepayoff is
concrete: lightweightprobesrecovermostofthe
detectionsignalwhenlabelsarescarce, trained
judges dominatewhen supervision is plentiful,
andtwoselectivegates liftamemory-grounded
agentfrom62.4%to79.3%servedaccuracywhile
halvingflaggedunfaithfulness,atnoextragener
ationcost.WeseeSIRINasasteptowardver
ificationbecomingastandardlayerof theLLM
stack: everygroundedresponsechecked, every
unsupportedspanvisible, andeverynewdetec
toroneplug-inaway. SIRINis releasedunder
Apache2.0athttps://github.com/sb-ai-lab/
SIRIN,withtheWebUI,configurationpresets,and
memory-integrationexamples.
6
Limitations
attention maps. In Proceedings of the 2024 Con
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
SIRIN’s probing and judge detectors are trained
on English data and have not been validated in mul
tilingual settings. Detector accuracy still depends
on the quality and domain match of the annotated
data used to fit probes and fine-tune judges, so out
of-domain deployment may require re-calibration.
The memory gating results are evaluated with a sin
gle generator backbone, using probes over its hid
den states and one API judge as gates; we have not
yet evaluated gate transfer across unrelated back
bones without refitting. Finally, the interactive Web
UI currently keeps a fixed number of model con
figurations warm in memory (6–8 on one A100),
which bounds how many detectors can be com
pared live without additional hardware.
References
Alexandra Bazarova, Aleksandr Yugay, Andrey Shulga,
Alina Ermilova, Andrei Volodichev, Konstantin
Polev, Julia Belikova, Rauf Parchiev, Dmitry
Simakov, Maxim Savchenko, Andrey Savchenko,
Serguei Barannikov, and Alexey Zaytsev. 2025. Hal
lucination detection in llms with topological diver
gence on attention graphs. Transactions on Machine
Learning Research. ArXiv:2504.10063.
Julia Belikova, Konstantin Polev, Rauf Parchiev, and
Dmitry Simakov. 2025. Data-efficient meta-models
for evaluation of context-based questions and an
swers in llms. In Proceedings of the 48th Inter
national ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval, pages 4385
4389. ACM.
Sky CH-Wang, Benjamin Van Durme, Jason Eisner, and
Chris Kedzie. 2024. Do androids know they’re only
dreaming of electric sheep? In Findings of the As
sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024,
pages 4401–4420. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and
Geoffrey E. Hinton. 2020. A simple framework for
contrastive learning of visual representations. In Pro
ceedings of the 37th International Conference on Ma
chine Learning (ICML), volume 119 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research, pages 1597–1607.
PMLR.
Prateek Chhikara, Dev Khant, Saket Aryan, Taranjeet
Singh, and Deshraj Yadav. 2025. Mem0: Building
production-ready AI agents with scalable long-term
memory. CoRR, abs/2504.19413.
Yung-Sung Chuang, Linlu Qiu, Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Ran
jay Krishna, Yoon Kim, and James R. Glass. 2024.
Lookback lens: Detecting and mitigating contextual
Processing, pages 1419–1436. Association for Com
putational Linguistics.
Shahul Es, Jithin James, Luis Espinosa Anke, and
Steven Schockaert. 2024. Ragas: Automated evalua
tion of retrieval augmented generation. In Proceed
ings of the 18th Conference of the European Chap
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
System Demonstrations, pages 150–158. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Ekaterina Fadeeva, Roman Vashurin, Akim Tsvigun,
Artem Vazhentsev, Sergey Petrakov, Kirill Fedyanin,
Daniil Vasilev, Elizaveta Goncharova, Alexander
Panchenko, Maxim Panov, Timothy Baldwin, and
Artem Shelmanov. 2023. Lm-polygraph: Uncertainty
estimation for language models. In Proceedings of
the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat
ural Language Processing: System Demonstrations,
pages 446–461. Association for Computational Lin
guistics.
Jizhan Fang, Xinle Deng, Haoming Xu, Ziyan Jiang,
Yuqi Tang, Ziwen Xu, Shumin Deng, Yunzhi Yao,
Mengru Wang, Shuofei Qiao, Huajun Chen, and
Ningyu Zhang. 2026. LightMem: Lightweight and
efficient memory-augmented generation. In The
Fourteenth International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR).
Sebastian Farquhar, Jannik Kossen, Lorenz Kuhn, and
Yarin Gal. 2024. Detecting hallucinations in large
language models using semantic entropy. Nature,
630(8017):625–630.
Marina Fomicheva, Shuo Sun, Lisa Yankovskaya,
Frédéric Blain, Francisco Guzmán, Mark Fishel,
Nikolaos Aletras, Vishrav Chaudhary, and Lucia Spe
cia. 2020. Unsupervised quality estimation for neural
machine translation. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, 8:539–555.
John Hewitt and Percy Liang. 2019. Designing and in
terpreting probes with control tasks. In Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat
ural Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 2733–2743. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong,
Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong Chen,
Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, and Ting
Liu. 2025. A survey on hallucination in large lan
guage models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and
open questions. ACM Transactions on Information
Systems.
Maximilian Ilse, Jakub M. Tomczak, and Max Welling.
2018. Attention-based deep multiple instance learn
ing. In Proceedings of the 35th International Con
ference on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 80 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages
7
hallucinations in large language models using only
2127–2136. PMLR.
Jeffrey Ip. 2024.
Deepeval: The open-source
llm evaluation framework. https://github.com/
confident-ai/deepeval.
Ziwei Ji, Delong Chen, Etsuko Ishii, Samuel Cahyaw
ijaya, Yejin Bang, Bryan Wilie, and Pascale Fung.
2024. Llm internal states reveal hallucination risk
faced with a query. In Proceedings of the 7th Black
boxNLP Workshop: Analyzing and Interpreting Neu
ral Networks for NLP, pages 88–104. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan
Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Yejin Bang, Delong Chen,
Wenliang Dai, Ho Shu Chan, Andrea Madotto, and
Pascale Fung. 2023. Survey of hallucination in nat
ural language generation. ACM Computing Surveys,
55(12):248:1–248:38.
Jannik Kossen, Jiatong Han, Muhammed Razzak, Lisa
Schut, Shreshth A. Malik, and Yarin Gal. 2024. Se
mantic entropy probes: Robust and cheap hallucina
tion detection in llms. CoRR, abs/2406.15927.
Ádám Kovács and Gábor Recski. 2025. Lettucedetect:
A hallucination detection framework for rag applica
tions. CoRR, abs/2502.17125.
Xixun Lin, Yucheng Ning, Jingwen Zhang, Yan Dong,
Yilong Liu, Yongxuan Wu, Xiaohua Qi, Nan Sun,
Yanmin Shang, Pengfei Cao, Lixin Zou, Xu Chen,
Chuan Zhou, Jia Wu, Shirui Pan, Bin Wang, Yanan
Cao, Kai Chen, Songlin Hu, and Li Guo. 2025.
Llm-based agents suffer from hallucinations: A sur
vey of taxonomy, methods, and directions. CoRR,
abs/2509.18970.
Zhouhan Lin, Minwei Feng, Cícero Nogueira dos San
tos, Mo Yu, Bing Xiang, Bowen Zhou, and Yoshua
Bengio. 2017. A structured self-attentive sentence
embedding. In 5th International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR). OpenReview.net.
Jiaqi Liu, Yaofeng Su, Peng Xia, Siwei Han, Zeyu
Zheng, Cihang Xie, Mingyu Ding, and Huaxiu Yao.
2026. Simplemem: Efficient lifelong memory for
llm agents. CoRR, abs/2601.02553.
Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, and Mark J. F. Gales.
2023. Selfcheckgpt: Zero-resource black-box hal
lucination detection for generative large language
models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 9004–9017. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike
Lewis, Wen tau Yih, Pang Wei Koh, Mohit Iyyer,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023.
Factscore: Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual
precision in long form text generation. In Proceed
ings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 12076–12100.
Cheng Niu, Yuanhao Wu, Juno Zhu, Siliang Xu,
KaShun Shum, Randy Zhong, Juntong Song, and
Tong Zhang. 2024. Ragtruth: A hallucination cor
pus for developing trustworthy retrieval-augmented
language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd An
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 10862
10878. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. 2018.
Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable ques
tions for squad. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin
guistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 784–789.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Elisei Rykov, Kseniia Petrushina, Maksim Savkin,
Valerii Olisov, Artem Vazhentsev, Kseniia Titova,
Alexander Panchenko, Vasily Konovalov, and Julia
Belikova. 2025. When models lie, we learn: Multilin
gual span-level hallucination detection with psiloqa.
In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2025, pages 11663–11682. As
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Snowflake Inc. 2024. Trulens: Evaluation and tracking
for llm experiments and ai agents. https://github.
com/truera/trulens.
Manveer Singh Tamber, Forrest Sheng Bao, Chenyu Xu,
Ge Luo, Suleman Kazi, Minseok Bae, Miaoran Li,
Ofer Mendelevitch, Renyi Qu, and Jimmy Lin. 2025.
Benchmarking llm faithfulness in rag with evolving
leaderboards. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process
ing: Industry Track, pages 799–811. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
UpTrain AI. 2023. Uptrain: An open-source uni
fied platform to evaluate and improve generative ai
applications. https://github.com/uptrain-ai/
uptrain.
Roman Vashurin, Ekaterina Fadeeva, Artem Vazhentsev,
Lyudmila Rvanova, Daniil Vasilev, Akim Tsvigun,
Sergey Petrakov, Rui Xing, Abdelrahman Sadallah,
Kirill Grishchenkov, Alexander Panchenko, Timothy
Baldwin, Preslav Nakov, Maxim Panov, and Artem
Shelmanov. 2025. Benchmarking uncertainty quan
tification methods for large language models with
lm-polygraph. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 13:220–248.
Artem Vazhentsev, Lyudmila Rvanova, Gleb Kuzmin,
Ekaterina Fadeeva, Ivan Lazichny, Alexander
Panchenko, Maxim Panov, Mrinmaya Sachan,
Preslav Nakov, Timothy Baldwin, and Artem Shel
manov. 2026. Efficient hallucination detection for
llms using uncertainty-aware attention heads. In Pro
ceedings of the 43rd International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research. PMLR. ArXiv:2505.20045.
Raúl Vázquez, Timothee Mickus, Elaine Zosa, Teemu
8
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Vahtola, Jörg Tiedemann, Aman Sinha, Vincent
answer. SIRIN separates where to look from what
Segonne, Fernando Sánchez-Vega, Alessandro Ra
ganato, Jindˇ rich Libovický, Jussi Karlgren, Shaox
iong Ji, Jindˇ rich Helcl, Liane Guillou, Ona de Gib
ert, Jaione Bengoetxea, Joseph Attieh, and Mari
anna Apidianaki. 2025. Semeval-2025 task 3: Mu
shroom, the multilingual shared-task on hallucina
tions and related observable overgeneration mistakes.
In Proceedings of the 19th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2025), pages 2472
2497. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Min-Hsuan Yeh, Max Kamachee, Seongheon Park,
and Yixuan Li. 2025. Halluentity: Benchmarking
and understanding entity-level hallucination detec
tion. Transactions on Machine Learning Research.
ArXiv:2502.11948.
Yuheng Zha, Yichi Yang, Ruichen Li, and Zhiting Hu.
2023. Alignscore: Evaluating factual consistency
with a unified alignment function. In Proceedings
of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 11328–11348. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Tianhang Zhang, Lin Qiu, Qipeng Guo, Cheng Deng,
Yue Zhang, Zheng Zhang, Chenghu Zhou, Xinbing
Wang, and Luoyi Fu. 2023. Enhancing uncertainty
based hallucination detection with stronger focus. In
Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 915
932. Association for Computational Linguistics.
A Toolkit Implementation Details
This appendix expands on the implementation
mechanisms summarized in §2.
Feature processors. A feature processor maps
a batch of chat-formatted samples to tensors.
SIRIN supports hidden states, attention maps,
logits, sublayer outputs, Lookback Lens-style at
tention ratios, topological features over attention
graphs, and token- or sequence-level uncertainty
scores (Chuang et al., 2024; Bazarova et al., 2025;
Fadeeva et al., 2023). Formally, a processor com
putes
ϕk(x;M,ℓ) → zk,
where M is the selected backend model, ℓ is an
optional layer index, and zk is a feature block. A
composing processor aligns layers, padding, and
masks across feature families and extracts com
patible blocks from one shared forward pass, so
multi-signal probes cost close to one model pass
instead of one pass per signal.
Token location and pooling. White-box detec
tors often depend on where internal states are read:
the last generated token, the end-of-sequence to
ken, a response boundary, or a window around the
to extract. A token locator resolves answer-token
positions, boundary offsets, substring anchors, and
local neighborhoods; a pooling operator then maps
selected token states to fixed-size features:
z =pool ϕ(x)T ,
T = locate(x).
This makes method-specific assumptions explicit
in configuration. For example, a Lookback Lens
style detector is specified by choosing the context
answer boundary and the attention-ratio proces
sor (Chuang et al., 2024), while attention-pooling
probes can learn how to aggregate distributed token
or layer evidence (Lin et al., 2017; Ilse et al., 2018).
Splitting and aggregation. A splitter decom
poses the context, the response, or both into char
acter windows, sentences, paragraphs, token-aware
chunks, LangChain7 chunks, or LLM-extracted
atomic claims. Any detector can score the resulting
segments. Segment scores {si}n
i=1 are folded back
into a response-level score by
s =aggregate(s1,...,sn),
where aggregate can be mean, maximum, mini
mum, majority vote, fixed weighting, or learned
fusion.
Efficiency and reproducibility. SIRIN exposes
efficiency mechanisms as interface features. Lo
cal backends process large datasets in fixed-size
chunks, validate returned tensors, and merge par
tial outputs. API backends use bounded asyn
chronous fan-out with retry logic. Extracted fea
tures are cached by canonicalized sample digest,
model identifier, layer, and feature type, so adding
a layer, enabling a new feature family, or resuming
an interrupted run recomputes only missing arti
facts. Probe features are normalized per block and
adaptively compressed with PCA or UMAP8 only
when dimensionality exceeds a configured thresh
old. These details keep detector sweeps practical
and let UI presets stay warm, while inference reuses
the same serialized transforms as training.
Logging. Logging is pluggable through Weights
& Biases9, ClearML10, and other simultaneous
trackers; the full run configuration (backend, pro
cessors, token locator, detector, splitter, calibration
7https://python.langchain.com/
8https://umap-learn.readthedocs.io/
9https://wandb.ai/
10https://clear.ml/
9
to the positive label. For span localization, decoder
rule, and aggregation strategy) is serialized with
every run.
B Full Feature Table
Table 6 summarizes the main interface features of
SIRIN.
Highlight
Why does it matter?
One report
schema
White-box ↔
black-box
One-pass
multi-signal
probes
Configurable
token location
Any detector
becomes local
UE catalog in
one API
Probes, judges, uncertainty
estimators, and ensembles all
produce the same calibrated
inspection object.
Transformers, vLLM, and API
backends make access
assumptions explicit and
swappable.
Hidden states, logits, attention,
lookbacks, topology, and UE
scores can be composed without
repeated extraction.
Last-token probes, boundary
probes, substring anchors, and
Lookback Lens-style ratios
become config choices.
Sentence, paragraph, token-aware,
and atomic-claim splitting enables
span inspection from
response-level methods.
LM-POLYGRAPH estimators,
calibration, and fusion are exposed
as regular SIRIN detectors.
Built for sweeps
Batching, feature caching,
adaptive compression,
resumability, and logging make
ablations and UI presets practical.
Table 6: SIRIN interface highlights. The toolkit empha
sizes reusable detector abstractions rather than a single
hallucination-detection method.
C Experimental Setup Details
Probing methods are trained on the annotated split
over hidden states taken from the middle layer
and attention-pooled across tokens (CH-Wang
et al., 2024); they comprise an ℓ2-regularized lo
gistic regression, CatBoost classifiers over hidden
states mean-pooled across tokens, and an ensemble
that additionally incorporates lookback-ratios fea
tures (Chuang et al., 2024). Encoder judges based
on ModernBERT11 and DeBERTa-v312 are fine
tuned with LoRA, and the Qwen3-4B13 decoder
judge is evaluated both zero-shot and after LoRA
adaptation. GPT-5.4-mini receives only the textual
input and is scored from the probability it assigns
11https://hf.co/answerdotai/ModernBERT-large
12https://hf.co/microsoft/deberta-v3-large
13https://hf.co/Qwen/Qwen3-4B
and API judges emit explicit span tags.
D Detector Discrimination Across
Memory Frameworks
Appendix E evaluates the gates end-to-end,
whereas this section measures how well the probe
separates the labeled construct, independent of how
a gate uses the resulting ranking. We hold the probe
configuration and the relabeling fixed across all
three memory systems, so each task’s three rows
are directly comparable.
Task
Memory system
AUROC
AP Prev.
SimpleMem
Answerability
Mem0
LightMem
0.843 [.81,.88] 0.762 0.356
0.913 [.89,.94] 0.935 0.566
0.884 [.85,.91] 0.860 0.407
SimpleMem
Faithfulness
Mem0
LightMem
0.793 [.74,.84] 0.641 0.226
0.876 [.84,.91] 0.692 0.262
0.844 [.81,.88] 0.655 0.254
Table 7: Probe discrimination for the three memory
systems on the shared appendix relabelling, one probe
configuration throughout. Layer 30 is selected in 27 of
30 folds. Intervals are 95% dependency-cluster boot
strap. AUROC is the headline because it is invariant
to prevalence, which ranges from 0.226 to 0.566 here.
AP is reported beside its prevalence and should not be
compared across systems for that reason. Restricting
to the cohort labeled in all three systems (n=474 for
answerability, 500 for faithfulness) leaves every value
within 0.01 and the ordering unchanged.
The probe discriminates well on every system
and best on Mem0. Together with Table 8, these
results separate two easily conflated quantities: a
detector’s accuracy about its label and the served ac
curacy recovered by a gate. Detector AUROCalone
therefore does not predict the value of a gate. The
coverage headroom and label–correctness bounds
in Appendix E cap what any gate can recover.
E Trustworthy Memory on Additional
Memory Frameworks
Table 5 builds the selective-prediction layer on Sim
pleMem. To test whether it depends on that mem
ory framework, we run the same two gates over
Mem0(Chhikara et al., 2025) and LightMem (Fang
et al., 2026), holding the generator, the probe con
figuration and the 80% coverage target fixed. Only
the memory framework changes.
These panels do not use the exact Table 5
pipeline. They apply a revised relabelling on the
full N=500. Table 5 instead validates evidence
quotes and drops 24 SimpleMem rows to N=476,
10
Detector Condition Servedaccuracy(%) Strict
unfaith. (%)
Abstain
rate(%)
∆tokens
LLMgen. Single Multi Temporal Overall
(a)Mem0(N=500)– Memorybaseline 41.0 31.6 26.3 37.8 35.1 0.0 0%
Oracle Correctness@80%cov.––– 47.2– 20.0 0%
SIRINProbing
+Answerabilitygate 49.2 34.9 28.9 43.5 36.1 20.0 −17.0%
+Faithfulnessgate 40.6 39.1 23.2 39.8 25.3 20.0 0%
+Bothgates 48.8 43.1 29.4 46.9 27.1 36.4 −17.0%
SIRINJudge
+Answerabilitygate 52.6 33.0 31.1 43.5 40.9 20.0 −19.8%
+Faithfulnessgate 41.4 42.1 27.8 42.8 23.2 20.0 0%
+Bothgates 53.6 45.9 35.8 51.0 28.7 38.0 −19.8%
(b)LightMem(N=500)– Memorybaseline 48.1 63.9 31.6 50.2 33.1 0.0 0%
Oracle Correctness@80%cov.––– 62.7– 20.0 0%
SIRINProbing
+Answerabilitygate 61.6 64.4 33.0 54.2 32.9 20.0 −23.3%
+Faithfulnessgate 49.0 70.5 31.1 50.0 26.1 20.0 0%
+Bothgates 63.2 69.8 34.5 55.3 26.3 36.4 −23.3%
SIRINJudge
+Answerabilitygate 62.7 64.4 36.4 56.5 32.6 20.0 −26.0%
+Faithfulnessgate 49.3 78.6 37.6 56.2 22.1 20.0 0%
+Bothgates 63.0 79.3 48.5 64.5 22.1 36.4 −26.0%
Table8:SIRINasaselective-predictionlayerforMem0(Chhikaraetal.,2025)andLightMem(Fangetal.,2026)
onLongMemEval(N=500each), intheformatofTable5.Qwen3.5-35B-A3Bgeneratesallanswers. SIRIN
useseitherprobesover thegenerator’shiddenstatesorGPT-5.4-miniasatext-onlyjudge. Singlegatesusea
retrospectiverankcut totarget80%coverage. AppendixElistshowthesepanelsdifferfromTable5andthe
caveatsbothtablesshare.Bothgateintersectionsbeattheirungatedbaselineunderadependency-clusterbootstrap
(10,000resamples).OnMem0,Probing+Bothgains+9.1points(CI95[+5.9,+12.3])andJudge+Both+13.2
points([+10.1,+16.4]).OnLightMem,thegainsare+5.1([+1.9,+8.4])and+14.3([+11.0,+17.7]).Unlikeon
SimpleMem,thejudgesignificantlyoutperformstheprobeonbothsystems(pairedProbing−Judge∆:Mem0
CI95[−7.8,−0.4];LightMem[−13.1,−5.1]),whiletheanswerabilitygatesaloneareindistinguishable(Mem0
[−2.1,+2.2];LightMem[−4.5,+0.0]).AsinTable5,OverallincludesallLongMemEvalquestioncategoriesand
Knowledge-Updateisnotshownasacolumn.
whichputsitsanswerabilityabstentionat21.2%
insteadof20.0%. ItsStrict-unfaithcolumnisthe
probe’sowntraininglabel,whereasherethatcol
umncomesfromanindependentClaudeSonnet5
judge.Thecoveragethreshold,asinTable5,isa
transductivewithin-evaluationrankcut.
Findings. Thetwogatescarryovertobothframe
works.Combined, theyraiseservedaccuracyby
+13.2pointsonMem0and+14.3onLightMem
under the judge, andthecaption’sbootstrapin
tervalsexcludezero. Thefaithfulnessgatealso
lowersservedunfaithfulness.Becausethatcolumn
isscoredindependentlyoftheprobe,thereduction
isrealratherthananartifactofitsownlabel:un
derthejudgeitfallsfrom35.1to23.2onMem0
andfrom33.1to22.1onLightMem. Theprobe
transferslesswell. Itsfaithfulnessgateisflaton
LightMemandaddsonly+2.0pointsonMem0,so
mostofitsliftcomesfromtheanswerabilitygate.
Thesepanelsarenotarankingofmemoryframe
works: theungatedbaselinesdiffertoowidely,so
readeachwithinitsownsystem



_________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

CrystalMem: Elastic Memory for Self-Evolving
LLM Agents via Knowledge Crystallization
Beining Wu, Member, IEEE, and Jun Huang, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Memory for self-evolving large language model (LLM) agents is often provisioned as if its byte budget only grows. Cloud
platforms, however, adjust quotas with load and cost, and we show that capability does not follow the budget back up: after a
squeeze-and-recover cycle, the agent settles below its pre-squeeze level, a gap we call memory hysteresis. The cause is structural.
Deletion and one-way compression discard the material needed for later rebuilding, and we prove that any policy that only keeps or
drops entries carries a residual-deficit floor. We propose CrystalMem (Crystallized Memory), an elastic memory sidecar that demotes
entries across four fidelity states under a crystallization-energy schedule, orders demotions by advantage-weighted influence with
dependency coupling, and recovers capability through verified recrystallization under explicit compute and byte caps. Across seven
environments, seventeen methods, and six backbones, with multi-tenant serving and a physical edge–cloud deployment, CrystalMem
achieves the highest restored capability in every setting and closes the loop left open by every baseline. From a 50% byte budget,
CrystalMem matches the strongest budgeted baseline at full provision on every environment; at equal budgets, it leads by +4.6pp on
average.
Index Terms—Agent memory, self-evolving LLM agents, knowledge crystallization, elastic resource management, cloud computing,
LLM serving, memory management, energy efficiency.
arXiv:2608.00303v1  [cs.AI]  31 Jul 2026
1 INTRODUCTION
SELF-evolving large language model (LLM) agents im
prove by accumulating experience. Trajectories, distilled
skills, and facts are written to an external memory and
retrieved for later tasks [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7]. Pro
duction systems now treat this store as a managed memory
plane, with consolidation pipelines [8], [9], [10] and value
based governance [11], [12], [13], [14], [15] deciding what
stays. One layer below, the cloud serving stack already
treats resources as elastic: compute is scheduled [16], [17],
[18], [19], [20], [21], [22], the key–value cache is paged
and reclaimed [23], and quotas move with load and cost.
Agent memory is the exception. Its byte budget is usually
provisioned as if it could only grow, although a shared cloud
offers no such guarantee.
Budgets move in every other tier, but prior work has not
asked what around trip of the memory budget does to agent
capability. Our measurements show that capability does not
simply return with the bytes. When the quota falls, current
stores shed bytes by deleting entries or by compressing
them in one direction; both choices discard material that
would be needed to rebuild the entry later. When the
quota returns, nothing regenerates. The agent settles below
its pre-squeeze level even though the original provision
is fully available again (Figs. 1 and 2). We call this gap
memory hysteresis: the store’s capability depends not only
on the budget it has, but also on the path the budget took.
Retention therefore has to become reversible. Compression
ladders that demote entries into coarser representations [24]
• Beining Wu and Jun Huang are with the Department of Electrical Engi
neering and Computer Science, South Dakota State University, Brookings,
SD 57006 USA.
E-mail: Wu.Beining@jacks.sdstate.edu; Jun.Huang@sdstate.edu
✦
keep more information than deletion, but they only move
downward, so each squeeze leaves a permanent loss. Re
versible compression exists [25], yet reversibility alone does
not decide which entry to demote under a falling budget
or whether a later reconstruction is faithful. Value-based
governance chooses better survivors [11], [26], [27], [28], but
a policy that keeps an entry verbatim or drops it leaves no
residue to rebuild from. Closing the loop requires fidelity
states to demote into, a schedule that moves entries in both
directions as the budget moves, and a gate that verifies what
returns.
These requirements sit across three research lines. Agent
memory and self-evolution build stores that grow, consol
idate, and retrieve under a fixed provision [8], [9], [10],
[29], [30]. Memory compression and governance reduce or
curate the store through one-way ladders, opportunistic
reversibility, or binary selection [11], [24], [25], [31], [32],
[33]. Elastic serving and evaluation reclaim resources below
the memory plane and measure memory at fixed provi
sions [16], [17], [23], [34], [35], [36], [37], [38], [39], [40], [41],
[42], [43], [44]. None treats fidelity as a two-way function of
the byte budget, schedules demotion and promotion against
that budget, or verifies what a promotion brings back. As a
result, no current system closes the capability loop under an
elastic memory budget.
To close this loop, we introduce CrystalMem
(Crystallized Memory), an elastic memory sidecar for self
evolving agents. CrystalMem treats retention as reversible
state assignment through two coupled mechanisms. First,
knowledge crystallization assigns every entry to one of four
fidelity states, from full form down to a minimal trace. A
budget-driven schedule prices each demotion by the utility
it forgoes now plus the compute a later promotion will
cost, then takes the cheapest moves first until the store fits
PREPRINT
2
the incoming budget. Entry values come from an influence
estimator that attributes task outcomes to the entries that
served them. Value also flows over a dependency graph, so
entries that anchor other entries sink last. Second, verified
recrystallization keeps a residue and a set of invariants
for every demoted entry. When the budget expands, the
store regenerates entries from their residues and admits
only reconstructions that pass the invariant check, under
an explicit cap on regeneration compute. Both passes run
inside the serving path with one sorted sweep per stage
and no training. Deletion becomes the last resort instead of
the default.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows. They
divide into findings and designs: the phenomenon and
its floor are findings; the crystallization mechanisms are
designs; the serving stack and benchmark environments are
adopted from prior work and are not claimed as contribu
tions.
• Weidentify and measure memory hysteresis in elastic
budget agent memory: a squeeze-and-recover cycle
leaves capability below its pre-squeeze level even
after the budget fully returns. We formalize the effect
with a loop-area metric and prove a residual-deficit
floor for keep-or-drop policies.
• We propose CrystalMem: a four-state fidelity lad
der scheduled by crystallization energy under the
live budget, entry values estimated from advantage
weighted influence with dependency coupling, and
verified recrystallization under explicit compute and
byte caps. We prove feasibility, near-optimality, and
loop-closure guarantees.
• Weevaluate CrystalMem against seventeen methods
across seven environments and six backbones, in
multi-tenant serving, and on a physical edge–cloud
testbed. CrystalMem closes the loop left open by
every baseline, matches full-provision capability at
half the byte budget, and recovers capability at a
fraction of the energy needed to re-experience the
underlying episodes.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
reviews related work. Section 3 formalizes elastic mem
ory budgets and measures memory hysteresis. Section 4
presents CrystalMem. Section 5 reports the experimental
evaluation. Section 6 concludes the paper.
2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Agent Memory and Self-Evolution
A self-evolving large language model (LLM) agent improves
without weight updates by writing experience into external
memory and retrieving it at inference time [1], [2], [45],
[46], [47]. One line of work builds the store itself. Xu et
al. [29] propose A-MEM, which links and grows notes for
long-horizon recall; MemGPT [8] pages entries between the
context window and external storage; Mem0 [9] extracts and
consolidates long-term memory at production scale; and
MemoryOS[10]bringsoperating-system structure to storage,
update, and retrieval. These systems make memory larger,
better organized, and easier to retrieve.
A second line turns experience into competence. Voy
ager [3] grows a skill library from open-ended exploration;
Agent Workflow Memory[48] andReasoningBank [4] distill tra
jectories into reusable workflows and strategies; EvolveR [49]
and PolySkill [50] close an experience-driven lifecycle over
skills; AutoRefine [51] keeps stored expertise current; and
MEM1 [30] and Memory-as-Action [52] train the agent to
curate its own context. Across both lines, the store grows
and is trimmed under a fixed provision. The byte budget
is treated as a background constraint rather than a control
variable, and neither line asks how capability changes when
the budget shrinks and then returns.
2.2 Memory Compression and Governance
When memory must shrink, one family compresses it.
MaRS [31] summarizes episodes into reflections at a sin
gle tier; RecMem [32] consolidates recurrently for long
running agents; Human-Inspired memory [24] demotes en
tries through a ladder of representations, but only down
ward; and R3Mem [25] makes compression reversible, yet
promotes opportunistically, with no budget-driven schedule
and no gate that verifies what returns. A parallel theory
line frames memory compaction as a rate–distortion trade
off over a single compression event [53], [54], [55]. In these
systems, fidelity transitions are one-way or unscheduled;
none treats them as a two-way function of a moving byte
budget.
Closest to ours, a governance family decides which
entries deserve the bytes. CURATOR [11] scores net value
per byte and governs retention under a hard footprint; A
MAC [33] learns what to admit at write time; AgeMem [12]
learns a unified long- and short-term management policy;
Darwinian memory [56] lets a training-free store regulate
itself; and BudgetMem [27] learns selective retention under
explicit cost. These policies identify valuable entries, and
the strongest of them is our binary baseline. However,
each policy either keeps an entry verbatim or drops it.
Selection decides which entries survive a squeeze, but not
what fidelity the survivors should occupy or how evicted
capability should return when the budget does.
2.3 Elastic Serving and Evaluation
Elasticity is routine in the serving stack below the memory
store [57], [58], [59], [60], [61], [62], [63]. vLLM [23] manages
the key–value cache as a paged, reclaimable resource; sleep
time compute [34] spends idle cycles preparing context
before queries arrive; and governed shared memory [35]
arbitrates a store written by many agents. These systems
reclaim serving memory or schedule maintenance compute,
but they do not tie the fidelity of an experiential store to
the byte budget it receives. CrystalMem composes with this
layer rather than replacing it.
Evaluation is beginning to measure lifecycle effects.
MemoryAgentBench [36] measures accumulation and selec
tive forgetting over incremental interaction; Reclaim Eval [37]
finds that lossy retention can leave an agent worse off
than no memory at all; and Neuromem [64] decomposes
the streaming lifecycle of an external store into stages.
Each protocol measures at a fixed provision or at a single
degradation point, so capability that fails to return with the
PREPRINT 3
TABLE1
Notation.
Symbol Meaning
m,Dm environmentindex; itsquerydistribution
q,g(q,M) query;gradedoutcomein[0,1]understoreM
e,µ(·) memoryentry;bytemeasure
Ms,Ws storeatstages;entrieswrittenduringstages
bs,B0 budgetfractionatstages;provisionedbytes
S,∆b numberofstages;budgetspanmaxsbs−minsbs
π,Πb memorypolicy;binary-retentionclass
Csm capabilityonenvironmentmatstages
Γ,Hm capability–budgetloop;hysteresisarea
Dm residualdeficitafterthebudgetreturns
¯M,R entriesevictedinthesqueeze;re-observedsubset
ue,pe terminalmarginalutility;re-observationbound
budget remains invisible.Toourknowledge,nopriorsys
temschedulesfidelitymovementinbothdirectionsundera
bytebudget,andnopriorprotocolmeasureswhatanelastic
budgetdoestoagentcapability.
3 PRELIMINARIES AND MEMORY HYSTERESIS
ANALYSIS
Thissectionnamesandformalizesthefailuremode:under
anelasticbudget,capabilitylostduringasqueezedoesnot
automaticallyreturnwhenthebudget recovers.Wemodel
thememoryplaneanditselasticbudgets(Sec.3.1),define
andmeasurememoryhysteresis (Sec. 3.2), andshowwhy
deletion-basedretentioncannotclosetheloop(Sec.3.3).
3.1 SystemModelandElasticBudgets
Weconsideraself-evolvingLLMagenthostedinthecloud.
Completedepisodes appendexperiential entries, suchas
trajectories,distilledskills,andenvironmentfacts,toamem
orystore.At inference time, theagent retrieves fromthis
storetoconditionitspolicy.Thestoreisameteredresource,
anditsprovisionedbudgetchangeswithcostcontrol,tenant
load,andpricingevents.Wecallthisregimeanelasticbudget,
andwecallthestoragesideoftheagentthememoryplane.
Let edenote anentryandµ(e) its serialized size in
bytes.ForastoreM,writeµ(M)= e∈Mµ(e).Theagent
servesanenvironmentmwithquerydistributionDm.Time
isdividedintostagess=1,...,S.Duringstages,theagent
holdsstoreMs,answersqueries,andappendsnewwrites
Ws.Amemorypolicyπthenmaps(Ms,Ws)tothenextstore
Ms+1 under thebytebudget of stages+1.Capability is
theexpectedgradedoutcomeCs
m=Eq∼Dm
[g(q,Ms)].The
provider-facingproblemistosustainthiscapabilityacross
thefullbudgetpath:
maxπ
1
S
S
s=1
Eq∼Dm
[g(q,Ms)] s.t. µ(Ms)≤bsB0 ∀s.
(1)
Deployedpolicies fall into two classes. Binary reten
tionΠb keepsanentryverbatimordrops it, soMs+1⊆
Ms∪Ws. Recency eviction, expiry, and learned value
governance[11]belongtothisclass. Irreversibleladdersmay
replaceanentrybya lossytransform, but transitions run
inonly one direction: once demoted, an entry is never
rebuilt[24].Bothclassessharethesamestructuralproperty.
At trough (25%) Budget restored (100%)
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Normalized capability
LRU
Mem0
Irrev. Ladder
CURATOR
CrystalMem
Fig.1.Memoryhysteresisunderanelasticbudgetcycle.Capability
normalized toeachmethod’spre-squeeze level (sevenenvironments
×fiveseeds).After thebudget returnsto100%,everybaselinestays
belowitspre-squeezecapability;CrystalMemreturnstothefull-recovery
line(reddashed).
Asqueezestepisaprojection,andwhatitdiscardsre-enters
thestoreonlyiftheinputstreamsuppliesitagain.
Definition 1 (Elastic budget schedule). An elastic
cycle is the budget path b = (b1,...,bS) =
(1,0.75,0.5,0.25,0.5,0.75,1) with S = 7: a squeeze
phases∈{1,...,4}andarecoveryphases∈{4,...,7},with
span∆b=0.75.Allpoliciesrununder thesamepathandthe
samebyteaccounting(iso-budget).
3.2 TheMemoryHysteresisPhenomenon
Elasticbudgetsturnmemorymanagementintoaroundtrip:
thestoreissqueezedtoaquarterof itsprovisionandthen
restored. If thesqueezewere reversible, capabilitywould
retracethesamepathduringrecovery.Weborrowhysteresis
frommagnetismfor the failureof this retracing: thestate
of thesystemdependsonthepathof thecontrolvariable,
not onlyon its current value. The cycle traces a closed
pathΓ={(bs,Cs
m)}S
s=1 in the capability–budget plane,
andtheenclosedareameasureshowmuchrecovery lags
thesqueeze.
Definition2 (Hysteresis areaandresidual deficit). For a
policyπonenvironmentmunderDefinition1, thehysteresis
areaisthenormalizedloopintegral
Hm(π)= 1
C1m∆b Γ
Cdb , (2)
estimatedfromthestagedmeasurementsbythetrapezoidsum
ˆHm= 1
C1m∆b
S−1
s=1
1
2 Cs+1
m +Cs
m bs+1−bs , (3)
andtheresidualdeficit isDm(π)=C1
m−CS
m, thecapability
stillmissingoncethebudgetisfullyrestored.
Hm=0 exactlywhen the cycle retraces itself. Both
quantitiesarenormalizedbythepre-squeezecapabilityC1
m,
makingthemcomparableacrossenvironments.
Wemeasureone representative fromeachpolicyfam
ilyunderDefinition1: recencyeviction(LRU), single-tier
summarization (Mem0 [9]), a four-level irreversible lad
der [24], binaryvaluegovernance (CURATOR[11]), and
PREPRINT
(a) hysteresis area
4
(b) residual deficit (pp)
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
LRU
20
15
10
0 
5
Irrev. Ladder
Mem0
CURATOR
CrystalMem
Fig. 2. Two currencies of hysteresis damage: (a) normalized
hysteresis-loop area and (b) residual capability deficit after budget
restoration (mean±std across seven environments).
CrystalMem. The testbed covers seven environments: re
trieval (SF, TTL [36]), long-context dialogue (LoCoMo [65],
LongMemEval [66]), agentic control (ALFWorld [67], We
bArena [68]), and synthetic drift (SynDrift), with a Qwen2.5
7B host [69], a bge-m3 retriever [70], and five seeds. Two
regularities emerge.
Observation 1 (Ordered degradation at the trough). At the
squeeze trough (b4 = 0.25), median capability retention
orders by policy family: 0.585 (LRU) < 0.703 (Mem0)
< 0.755 (irreversible ladder) < 0.790 (CURATOR) < 0.841
(CrystalMem); see Fig. 1, left group.
Observation 2 (Restoration does not restore). After the bud
get returns to 100%, the four baselines plateau at 0.71–0.89
of their pre-squeeze capability and trace open loops with
ˆ
Hm between 0.086 and 0.207; CrystalMem returns to 0.984
with ˆHm = 0.010. See Fig. 1, right group, and Fig. 2.
The mechanism is simple. Evicted entries are gone,
recovery-phase writes replace only what the stream supplies
again, and retrieval degrades around the missing entries.
The next subsection shows that, for deletion-based reten
tion, this behavior follows from a bound rather than an
implementation choice.
3.3 Why Existing Memory Policies Cannot Close the
Loop
Two assumptions isolate what the argument needs.
Assumption 1 (Bounded re-observation). Let ¯
M be the set
of entries evicted during the squeeze phase. Each e ∈ ¯
M is
supplied again by the input stream during the recovery phase
with probability at most pe < 1.
Episodic streams rarely repeat: conversations move on,
tasks change, and drifting environments retire facts. Thus pe
is small in practice.
Assumption 2 (Additive terminal utility). There exist ue ≥ 0
such that removing any A ⊆ M from a store M at the terminal
stage lowers capability by at least 
e∈A ue; redundancy is
absorbed into the definition of ue.
Proposition 3 (Deficit lower bound for binary retention).
Fix the schedule of Definition 1 and any π ∈ Πb. Let ˜C denote
the terminal capability of the same run with bs ≡ 1. Under
Assumptions 1–2,
E ˜C −CS
m ≥ 
ue (1 −pe).
e∈ ¯M
(4)
Proof. Fix the stream and condition on the squeeze. Let
R ⊆ ¯M be the evicted entries supplied again during the
recovery phase; Assumption 1 gives P(e ∈ R) ≤ pe.Because
π is binary, an eviction leaves no residue. The terminal store
is therefore MS = M1 \ ¯M ∪ R ∪W, where W collects
recovery-phase writes, while the un-squeezed counterfac
tual holds ˜
M =M1∪W.Hence ˜M \MS ⊇ ¯M \R, and
Assumption 2 applied to A = ¯M \ R yields ˜C − CS
m ≥
e∈ ¯M\R ue. Taking expectation over re-observation gives
E ˜C −CS
m ≥ e∈¯MueP(e /∈ R) ≥ e∈¯M ue(1−pe).
The bound is not vacuous: the trough expels at least
1−b4 = 75%ofresident bytes, so the sum in (4) covers most
of what the agent has learned. We report deficits against
the pre-squeeze anchor C1
m. Value governance operates
within the bound, not beyond it. Choosing which entries
to evict reduces the sum but cannot make it vanish, and the
strongest binary baseline still forfeits 6.6±1.4pp, compared
with 17.5 ± 4.6pp for recency eviction (Fig. 2(b)).
Lossy tiers relax the binary premise only partially. A sin
gle tier fixes one exchange rate between bytes and fidelity;
a 4× squeeze exceeds that rate, so the tier deletes what
it cannot hold and inherits the bound (12.4 ± 2.9pp for
Mem0). A one-way ladder keeps residues at several rates
but never promotes them, so it serves degraded represen
tations even after the budget returns (10.1 ± 2.2pp). The
measurements separate the two levers: four tiers instead of
one buy 2.3pp, while the reversible stack of CrystalMem
buys another 9.0pp (1.1 ± 0.4pp). The proof uses only the
absence of a residue from which an entry can be rebuilt.
Store such a residue, and promotion by compute rather than
re-observation becomes possible. Reversibility is the first
order lever; tier count is second-order.
The analysis determines the design. The store must hold
entries at several fidelities and move them in both direc
tions, using a reversible ladder rather than one-way demo
tion. Because the sum in (4) is weighted by ue, demotion
must track marginal utility, and entries that anchor others
must sink last. Because re-synthesis spends tokens and
can hallucinate, promotion must be budgeted and verified
before it re-enters the store. CrystalMem is built around
exactly these requirements.
4 CRYSTALMEM DESIGN
4.1 Overview
The analysis gives three design requirements: a reversible
ladder, utility-aware demotion, and verified promotion.
CrystalMem implements them with a single control loop
around the store (Fig. 3), executed once per stage in three
phases. Monitor maintains per-entry value estimates. Crys
tallize reassigns fidelity states to satisfy the incoming byte
PREPRINT
5
(a) The elastic stage loop
Influence 
& coupling
CrystalMem
Energy
schedule
Budget path: Each stage arrives with its own byte budget: it may tighten, tighten again,
then relax. The store must survive the squeeze and recover what it gave up.
Phase I:Monitor
Phase II:
Crystallize
crystallization 
front
Verify &
promote
Phase III:
Recrystallize
snapshot (b, C)
(b) Fidelity ladder and energy schedule
FULL
COMPRESSED
to verification
SKELETAL
gate
cheapest to demote
TRACE
Water-filling descent
Regenerate from residue,
then verify before promotion
(c) Verification gate
from COMPRESSED
crystallization front 
descends
from SKELETAL
from TRACE
Generate × Verify
one unmet
to FULL
two unmet
COMPRESSED
three unmet
to SKELETAL
Fig. 3. CrystalMem framework. (a) Each stage runs one control loop: Monitor scores entries by advantage-weighted influence with dependency
coupling, Crystallize fits the store to the incoming byte budget, and Recrystallize buys capability back when the budget relaxes. (b) A crystallization
front descends the four-state fidelity ladder by water-filling on energy, demoting the cheapest entries first. (c) Recrystallization regenerates promoted
entries from their residues and admits a draft only after verification confirms the invariants stored at demotion time.
budget. Recrystallize buys back capability when the budget
expands. The stage transition factorizes as
pMs+1 | Ms,bs+1 =
×
φfs+1
e
e∈Ms
| fs
e, ηe
R(e′ | ze,Ms)V(ve | e′,he) ,
A demotion decision trades utility now against compute
later. We price both terms in one score,
ηe(k) = ˜ve(1−rk) + τ ck,
(6)
the utility forgone by holding e at state k plus the antici
pated cost of buying it back, with τ converting regeneration
tokens into capability cost. Given the incoming budget,
Crystallize solves the constrained assignment
e∈Us
(5)
where the first factor crystallizes: an assignment kernel
φ moves each entry along the fidelity ladder fe under a
crystallization energy ηe. The second factor recrystallizes: a
generation operator R rebuilds promoted entries from their
residues ze, and a verification operator V checks the result
against stored invariants he. Deletion does not appear in
(5). It remains only as last-resort eviction of bottom-rung
residues.
4.2 Fidelity Ladder and Crystallization Energy
Observation 2 traced open loops to one-way demotion. The
ladder replaces deletion with reversible state assignment.
Every entry occupies one of K = 4 states, f1 (FULL)
through f4 (TRACE), with COMPRESSED and SKELETAL be
tween. At state k, an entry costs µk(e) bytes and delivers
a fraction rk of its utility, with µ1(e) > ··· > µ4(e) and
1 =r1 >··· >r4;regenerating from state k costs ck tokens,
increasing in k. From COMPRESSED down, each entry keeps
a residue ze, namely its state-k representation, and a set of
invariants he: key spans, entity tuples, and outcome facts
distilled at demotion time. These invariants later anchor
verification.
φ⋆ = argmin
φ
s.t.
ηe(φ(e))
e∈Ms
e∈Ms
µφ(e)(e) ≤ bs+1B0.
(7)
The objective is separable, so the Lagrangian e ηe(φ(e))+
θ ( eµφ(e)(e) − bs+1B0) is minimized rung by rung: an
entry stays at the deepest state whose marginal price
∆ηe/∆µe remains below the multiplier θ set by the budget.
CrystalMem implements this step as a water-filling descent,
demoting one rung at a time in increasing order of marginal
price until the store fits. We call the moving boundary the
crystallization front (Fig. 3(b)).
4.3 Influence-Driven Assignment
The bound (4) charges a policy for every unit of deleted util
ity, so demotion order must track ue. CrystalMem estimates
this value online.
Each retrieval attributes the query outcome back to the
entries it surfaced, baselined against recent outcomes:
Ie ← γIe+(1−γ)we 
g(q,M)−meanj∈Q gj
stdj∈Q gj
,
(8)
where we is the normalized retrieval weight of e in answer
ing q, Q is a sliding batch of recent queries, and γ is the
PREPRINT
6
averaging horizon. Entries that repeatedly appear in above
average outcomes accumulate influence; stale or decorative
entries decay toward zero. The estimator is white-box: it
uses only retrieval logs and graded outcomes, both already
produced by the serving path.
Entries are not independent: a skill cites facts, and a
trajectory can ground a distilled rule. CrystalMem maintains
a dependency graph over co-retrieval and reference edges
and lets influence flow across it,
˜
ve = Ie+λ
e′∈N(e)
x(e,e′)
j∈N(e) x(e,j) Ie′,
(9)
where N(e) is the neighborhood of e, x(e,e′) counts co
retrievals, and λ sets the coupling strength. Hub entries take
value from the entries they anchor and therefore sink last,
matching the demotion order required by the analysis. As a
hard guard, an entry is not demoted below SKELETAL while
a FULL neighbor still cites its invariants.
4.4 Recrystallization
Proposition 3 depends on evictions leaving no residue.
Recrystallization removes that condition.
When the budgetexpands, Recrystallize selects a promo
tion set
Us = argmax
U⊆Ms e∈U
s.t.
˜
ve ∆e
ce ≤ ρns, µ(Ms)+ 
e∈U
e∈U
∆µe ≤bs+1B0, 
(10)
where ∆e is the utility regained by lifting e one rung, ce is its
regeneration cost, ns is the serving-token count of the stage,
and ρ is the compute cap (default 10%). The two constraints
make the trade-off explicit: promotion may spend at most a
fixed share of serving compute and may never exceed the
byte budget. Greedy selection by density ˜ve∆e/ce gives the
standard knapsack approximation for (10) and runs in idle
windows between queries.
A selected residue is rebuilt by conditioning the host
modelonze andits graph neighborhood,e′ ∼ R(· | ze,Ms).
The draft is admitted only if the verification operator
confirms it against the stored invariants, V(e′,he) = 1
(Fig. 3(c)): every key span, entity tuple, and outcome fact
recorded at demotion time must be entailed by e′. A re
jected draft leaves the entry at its current rung, so a failed
promotion cannot degrade the store. Hallucinated recon
structions are filtered before they enter retrieval. Admission
therefore converts serving tokens into recovered capability,
the storage-for-compute exchange the ladder was built to
support.
Three properties locate the guarantees of the loop; only
the last one is idealized.
Proposition 4 (Feasibility invariance). Under Algorithm 1,
µ(Ms) ≤ bsB0 at every stage s.
Proof. The Crystallize loop demotes, and at the bottom
rung evicts, until the constraint holds. Each step strictly
decreases µ(M), so the loop terminates with a feasible store.
Promotions are admitted only within the byte headroom in
(10).
Proposition 5 (Near-optimality of the water-filling sched
ule). Suppose each entry’s marginal price ∆ηe/∆µe is nonde
creasing along the ladder. Then the Phase II schedule is optimal
for the fractional relaxation of (7), and its energy exceeds the
integral optimum by at most maxe [ηe(K) − ηe(1)], the span of
one entry.
Proof. Under nondecreasing prices, taking rung moves
greedily by price matches the fractional optimum up to
the single boundary move where the byte constraint be
comes tight, by the classical fractional-knapsack argument.
Rounding that move integrally charges at most one entry’s
span, and the fractional optimum lower-bounds the integral
one.
The promotion pass in (10) admits the same argument
per binding cap, losing at most one boundary entry for each
cap.
Proposition 6 (Loop closure under exact regeneration). Sup
pose no bottom-rung eviction occurs, R restores each promoted
residue to its full utility, and V has no false rejections. If the
caps in (10) admit all candidates during the recovery phase, then
E[Dm] → 0and the loop of Definition 2 closes.
Proof. Every squeezed entry retains its residue. Under the
stated hypotheses, each entry is lifted back to f1 as the bud
get returns, so the terminal store matches the counterfactual
store of Proposition 3 on the evicted mass. The deficit term
vanishes, the recovery branch retraces the squeeze branch,
and the enclosed area of Definition 2 is zero.
Both greedy passes sort once and sweep once,
O(|M|log|M|) per stage, with no training and no external
solver. The loop is cheap enough to run inside the serving
path.
4.5 System Implementation
CrystalMem runs as a sidecar beside the serving stack [23].
Monitor hooks the retrieval path and updates (8) inline;
Crystallize fires on budget events; and Recrystallize batches
its generation calls into idle windows, so foreground queries
do not wait on promotion. The store keeps, for each entry,
the current rung, the residue ze, the invariants he, and the
graph edges of (9). Under multi-tenancy, the same schedule
runs over the pooled budget with tenant-weighted values
and per-tenant capability floors. On edge hosts, a small
model runs Monitor and Crystallize locally and delegates
Rto the hub.
Taken together, CrystalMem turns retention into re
versible state assignment. Advantage-weighted influence
and a dependency kernel value each entry; a crystallization
energy schedule demotes entries along a four-state ladder
to satisfy the budget path; and a generation–verification
operator pair buys capability back under explicit compute
and byte caps, admitting only reconstructions that pass
invariant checks. Deletion becomes the last resort instead
of the default.
PREPRINT
7
Algorithm 1 CrystalMem Elastic-Stage Lifecycle (
Monitor ,
Crystallize , and
Recrystallize )
Input: store Ms, incoming budget bs+1, serving tokens ns,
compute cap ρ, rates γ,λ,τ
1: Phase I: Monitor
▷ budget and query telemetry
2: on a budget event bs+1 ̸ = bs, snapshot the loop
point (bs,Cs
m)
3: on each retrieval, update the influence Ie by (8)
4: refresh the coupled values ˜ve by (9)
5: Phase II: Crystallize
6: while µ(M) > bs+1B0 do
7:
pop
the
cheapest
▷ solve (7)
move e =
argmine ∆ηe/∆µe; raise the multiplier θ
to that price
8:
demote e one rung, distilling (ze,he) at its first
demotion; if already TRACE, evict e
9: end while
10: Phase III: Recrystallize
▷ verified promotion
11: select the promotion set U by (10)
12: for all e ∈ U do
13:
14:
draw e′ ∼ R(· | ze,M); admit one rung up iff
V(e′,he) = 1
charge ce to the recrystallization ledger; stop
once ρns is spent
15: end for
16: return Ms+1
5 EXPERIMENTS
5.1 Experimental Setup
1) Environments and Protocol: We evaluate on seven environ
ments in four workload families: retrieval under streaming
writes (the SF and TTL tracks of [36]), long-context dialogue
(LoCoMo [65] and LongMemEval [66], abbreviated LME),
agentic control (ALFWorld [67] and WebArena [68]), and
SynDrift, a synthetic protocol that retires facts mid-stream
(Drift). Every policy runs the elastic cycle of Definition 1
under the same byte accounting. Capability is measured at
each of the seven stages. Unless a table states otherwise,
reported numbers aggregate five seeds; the cost frontier, the
three largest backbone scales, the multi-tenant study, and
the deployment study use three.
2) Comparison Methods: We compare CrystalMem with
fifteen baselines, grouped as in Table 2. (i) Reference bounds:
keep-all, which ingests the same streams without a bud
get and bounds capability from above; LRU; expiry; and
random drop. (ii) Single-tier summarization: Mem0 [9],
MemGPT [8], and MaRS [31]. (iii) Hierarchical and ladder
policies: A-MEM [29], MemoryOS [10], the Human-Inspired
irreversible ladder [24], and R3Mem [25], which stores
reversible residues but promotes them without a sched
ule. (iv) Value governance: CURATOR [11], A-MAC [33],
RecMem [32], and AgeMem [12] with its learned admis
sion policy frozen. Each baseline enforces the stage budget
through its native retention knob. CrystalMem runs in two
configurations throughout: full, with dependency coupling
on, and lite, with coupling off.
3) Evaluation Metrics: We report the three loop metrics of
Definition 2: restored capability CS
m, hysteresis area ˆ
Hm es
timated by (3), and residual deficit Dm. Capability is scored
on a 0–100 scale, so deficits read directly in points (pp).
Two meters cover serving cost: the recrystallization ratio,
defined as promotion tokens divided by stream inference
tokens, and the scheduler share of stage wall-clock time.
4) Implementation Details: All policies serve from
vLLM [23] on A100 and H100 GPUs, with a Qwen2.5
7B-Instruct host [69] at temperature 0 and a bge-m3 re
triever [70]. Five additional backbone scales are evaluated
in Sec. 5.4.
5.2 Iso-Budget Main Comparison
Table 2 gives the iso-budget comparison. CrystalMem has
the highest restored capability on all seven environments,
averaging 57.4 against 52.8 for R3Mem, the strongest base
line in this comparison. The margin averages +4.6pp and
never falls below +3.4pp (WebArena). The loop metrics
separate the methods more sharply than raw capability:
mean hysteresis area falls to 0.013 against a baseline range
of 0.044–0.216, and mean residual deficit falls to 0.5pp.
The remaining headroom is small, since keep-all, which
never discards entries, ends only 1.3pp higher. The lite row
isolates dependency coupling: 0.6pp on average, concen
trated on ALFWorld (1.1pp) and WebArena (0.8pp), which
Sec. 5.4 revisits.
Figure 4 shows the cycles behind these aggregates. Every
method follows the squeeze downward. During recovery,
the baselines flatten, while CrystalMem rejoins the keep-all
trace, closes the budget–capability loop, and recovers most
of its trough loss one stage after the budget turns.
The deficit column shows the cost of each missing
lever. R3Mem keeps residues at several fidelities but pro
motes them without an energy schedule or a verification
gate; reversibility without scheduling forfeits 4.7pp. The
strongest binary policy, CURATOR, chooses evictions by
learned value but leaves no residue to rebuild from. The
floor of Proposition 3 then applies, and selection without re
versibility forfeits 6.1pp. The Human-Inspired ladder keeps
several fidelities but moves entries only downward. At
10.1pp, it trails even binary governance, because demoted
entries continue serving degraded representations after the
budget returns. Closing the loop needs both levers: residues
to rebuild from and a schedule that decides when to spend
them.
Two meters bound the serving cost of these gains.
Recrystallization uses 7.3% of stream inference tokens on
average and 9.1% at worst, within the token cap of (10). The
scheduler adds 3.4% of stage wall-clock time on average
and 3.8% at most. Across the 4,165-measurement grid, no
method exceeds its stage budget, and CrystalMem main
tains the feasibility invariant of Proposition 4 at every stage.
Table 3 restates the frontier in budget terms. The me
dian b⋆ across environments is 50%, with six environments
matched at half provision and TTL at 40%. Even a 40%
budget leaves at most a 0.7pp shortfall, and the curve is
flat above the match point: capability at a 60% budget stays
within 0.3pp of full provision on every environment. Over
the eight-budget grid, CrystalMem is never below LRU,
Mem0, or CURATOR at any operating point, so the ranking
does not depend on where a provider sits on the frontier.
PREPRINT 8
TABLE2
Iso-budgetcomparisonoveroneelasticcycle(Definition1):restoredcapabilityCSm(mean±std,fiveseeds), itsseven-environmentaverage,mean
hysteresisarea ¯H(3),andmeanresidualdeficit ¯D(pp).Thebestvalueineachbaselinefamilyisunderlined;thegainofCrystalMemovereach
rowappearsinthe∆column.Grayitalicistheunconstrainedkeep-allbound,notranked.
Retrieval Dialogue Agentic Synthetic
Method SF TTL LoCoMo LME ALF Web Drift Avg↑ ¯H↓ ¯D↓ ∆
Keep-all 66.8±0.5 59.1±0.6 58.3±0.2 55.5±0.7 68.9±0.8 30.3±0.7 72.5±0.8 58.8 — — −1.3
LRU 45.9±0.5 41.9±0.7 43.0±0.6 39.0±0.4 48.0±0.4 19.0±0.3 46.6±0.5 40.5 0.209 17.6 ↑16.9
Expiry 49.3±0.7 44.8±0.1 43.3±0.7 40.8±0.2 51.5±0.8 19.8±0.8 51.2±0.4 43.0 0.178 15.1 ↑14.5
Randomdrop 46.2±0.5 41.7±0.6 40.4±0.4 38.4±0.3 48.4±0.7 17.9±0.4 47.4±0.2 40.0 0.216 17.9 ↑17.4
Mem0[9][arXiv’25] 52.0±0.6 47.5±0.6 46.0±0.3 43.0±0.3 53.7±0.3 22.0±0.7 55.2±0.6 45.6 0.145 12.3 ↑11.8
MemGPT[8][COLM’24] 52.8±0.5 47.1±0.7 46.4±1.1 43.7±1.1 54.8±0.9 22.0±0.8 55.4±0.6 46.0 0.144 12.1 ↑11.4
MaRS[31][arXiv’25] 51.4±0.7 46.5±0.6 45.0±0.5 42.2±1.0 53.3±0.3 21.1±0.3 53.6±0.6 44.7 0.157 13.3 ↑12.7
A-MEM[29][NeurIPS’25] 54.7±0.3 48.5±0.2 47.7±0.6 44.8±0.4 56.7±0.4 22.9±0.8 57.7±0.4 47.6 0.121 10.5 ↑9.9
MemoryOS[10][EMNLP’25] 56.0±0.3 49.7±0.4 48.9±0.2 45.7±0.2 58.0±1.4 23.9±0.3 59.2±0.7 48.8 0.109 9.2 ↑8.7
Human-Inspired[24][arXiv’26] 54.6±0.4 48.7±0.5 48.0±0.8 45.0±0.4 57.1±0.5 22.6±0.5 58.1±0.4 47.7 0.122 10.1 ↑9.7
R3Mem[25][ACL’25] 60.0±0.6 53.5±0.4 53.1±0.6 49.6±0.3 62.5±0.8 26.3±0.8 64.6±0.3 52.8 0.044 5.2 ↑4.6
CURATOR[11][arXiv’26] 58.7±0.4 52.3±0.4 51.1±0.6 48.4±0.3 60.5±0.6 25.4±0.2 62.9±0.6 51.3 0.087 6.6 ↑6.1
A-MAC[33][ICLR-W’26] 58.0±0.3 51.6±0.6 51.2±0.6 47.7±0.4 60.0±0.8 25.1±0.5 62.4±0.5 50.8 0.088 7.2 ↑6.6
RecMem[32][ACL’26] 57.6±0.7 51.3±0.4 50.4±0.5 47.6±0.1 59.5±0.4 24.9±0.8 61.7±0.3 50.4 0.093 7.6 ↑7.0
AgeMem[12][arXiv’26] 56.8±1.0 50.9±0.8 50.2±0.3 46.9±0.4 58.9±0.5 24.3±0.8 60.7±0.3 49.8 0.102 8.2 ↑7.6
CrystalMem-lite 65.0±0.6 56.7±0.4 56.4±0.9 52.7±0.7 67.4±0.6 29.0±0.3 70.9±1.2 56.9 0.013 1.1 ↑0.6
CrystalMem(Ours) 65.1±0.4 57.4±0.7 56.6±0.5 53.2±1.2 68.6±0.5 29.8±0.3 71.3±1.0 57.4 0.013 0.5
LRU TTL Mem0 MemoryOS Irrev. Ladder R3Mem CURATOR CrystalMem Keep-all (oracle) Byte budget (%)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Stage
35
40
45
50
55
60
Capability
0
20
40
60
80
100
(a)LoCoMo
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Stage
40
50
60
70
Capability
0
20
40
60
80
100
(b)ALFWorld
25 50 75 100
Byte budget (%)
35
40
45
50
55
60
Capability
(c)Loops(LoCoMo)
4 5 6 7
Stage
0
20
40
60
80
100
Recovered share (%)
(d)Recoveredshare
Fig.4.Elasticitydynamicsunderthesqueeze–recoverschedule(seedmeans).(a),(b)CapabilitytrajectoriesonLoCoMoandALFWorld,withthe
bytebudgetoverlaidasgraystairs(rightaxis). (c)Budget–capabilityloopsonLoCoMo:arrowsgivetraversaldirection,andshadedregionsmark
theareasenclosedbyLRUandbyCrystalMem.(d)Shareoftroughlossrecoveredateachrecoverystage,averagedoverallsevenenvironments;
thereddashedlinemarksfull recovery.
Theprovisioningrule issimple: runthememoryplaneat
half itsnominal budget and losenothing relative to the
bestfixed-provisionbaseline. Figure5draws the frontier:
CrystalMemmeets thekeep-all reference at half budget,
andtheper-environmentcurveskeepitabovethestrongest
binarybaselineateveryoperatingpoint.
5.3 MechanismandTheoreticalValidation
Figure6tracesthemachineryofAlgorithm1onlivecycles.
Panel(a)tracksthestore’sfidelitycomposition.Atthestart,
85%of entries occupy the upper two states, FULL and
COMPRESSED. The squeezepushes all but 29%down to
SKELETALandTRACE;verifiedpromotionraisestheupper
sharebackto68%bythefinalstage.Thestoremovesinboth
directionsthroughfidelityspace.
Panel(b)checkstheinfluenceestimator(8)againstleave
one-outgroundtruthon200entriesineachofthreeenviron
ments.Spearmancorrelationreaches0.75–0.76,and75–80%
ofthetruetop-decileentrieslandintheestimatedtopdecile.
Theadvantage-weightedsignal isaccurateenoughtoorder
demotions.
Panel(c)splitsrecrystallizationbyoriginstate.Thegate
rejects 6.9%of reconstructions fromCOMPRESSED, 16.4%
fromSKELETAL, and27.5%fromTRACE. Rejection rises
withdemotiondepth,assparserresiduesleavemoreroom
for invariant violations.Admittedreconstructions recover
about 90%of retrieval utility regardless of origin, and
theirdownstreamcontribution remainspositive (+0.9 to
+1.0pp).Sec.5.4showsthecostofremovingthegate.
Panel(d)testsProposition3whereitapplies.Acrossthe
sevenbinarypolicies,measureddeficitstracktheestimated
boundwithcorrelation0.76andexceeditontwothirdsof
the245environment–seedpoints.CrystalMembreaks the
premise rather thanthebound: it keeps residues, andits
deficit(0.5pp,Table2)sitsanorderofmagnitudebelowev
erybinaryfloor.Togetherwiththezerobudgetviolationsof
PREPRINT 9
TABLE3
Iso-capabilitybudget(threeseeds).Ref isCURATOR,thestrongest
budgetedbaselineat fullprovision;b⋆ isthesmallestbudgetatwhich
CrystalMemmatchesit.CellsatoraboveRef inbold;themedianb⋆ in
red.
CrystalMematbudget
Env. Ref@100 40% 50% 60% b⋆
SF 66.3 66.2 67.0 67.1 50%
TTL 58.6 58.6 59.3 59.5 40%
LoCoMo 58.0 57.5 58.4 58.3 50%
LME 55.3 54.9 55.4 55.6 50%
ALF 68.5 68.1 68.7 69.1 50%
Web 29.9 29.3 30.6 30.7 50%
Drift 72.1 72.0 72.5 72.8 50%
Medianacrossenvironments 50%
10 20 30 40 50 60 80 100
Byte budget (%)
35
40
45
50
55
60
Capability
LRU
Mem0
MemoryOS
CURATOR
CrystalMem
Keep-all at 100%
(a)Frontier
10 20 30 40 50 60 80 100
Byte budget (%)
20
40
60
80
Capability
CrystalMem
CURATOR
(b)Perenvironment
Fig. 5. Cost frontier under constant provisioning (seed means).
(a)Seven-environmentmeancapabilityagainst thebytebudget; the
dashedlineiskeep-allat fullprovision;shadedbandsgiveseedvari
ation. (b) Per-environment curves (thin) and theirmeans (thick) for
CrystalMemandthestrongestbinarybaseline.
Sec.5.2andtheclosedloopsofTable2,thesemeasurements
groundPropositions4and6intheobservedcycles.
5.4 AblationsandSensitivity
Table4removesonedesignchoiceatatime;everyvariant
loses capability, sonocomponent is redundant. The full
rowre-runstheTable2configuration,anditsaveragelands
within0.1pp.Replacingthewater-fillingschedule(7)with
size-greedydemotioncosts1.8pp, andrandomdemotion
costs3.0pp:whichbytesarereclaimedmattersasmuchas
howmany.Thedemotionorderingreliesonthe influence
signal (8); recencycosts1.3pp, andrandomscoringcosts
3.7pp. Removing the verificationgate costs 2.8ppeven
thougheveryreconstructionisadmitted,becauseunverified
regenerations pollute retrieval. This is the failuremode
rejectedby thegate inFig. 6(c).Dependencycoupling is
thesmallestterm,0.4ppontheseven-environmentaverage,
concentratedonthetwoagenticenvironments,matchingthe
litegapinTable2.
Therecrystallizationcappricesloopclosuredirectly.At
ρ=0, thedeficit regresses to6.5pp,withinnoiseof the
strongestbinaryfloor (6.6pp,Table2); areversibleladder
withoutpromotioncompute isaslowerwaytoforget.At
ρ=5%, thedeficit falls to2.1pp, andraisingρfromthe
default10%to20%buysonly0.3pp.Ladderdepthshows
thesameknee: twostatesforfeit3.0pp, threeforfeit0.8pp,
andsixchangenothing(0.1pp),sothefour-stateladdersits
TABLE4
Ablationoveroneelasticcycle(sevenenvironments,fiveseeds):
seven-environmentaverages,with∆thedropinAvgrelativetofull
CrystalMem(default:water-fillingschedule,advantage-weighted
influence,ρ=10%,K=4states).
Variant Avg↑ ¯H↓ ¯D↓ ∆
CrystalMem(full) 57.3±0.3 0.015 0.7
Schedule→size-greedy 55.6±0.2 0.015 2.2 ↑1.8
Schedule→random 54.3±0.2 0.033 3.7 ↑3.0
Influence→recency 56.0±0.2 0.012 1.9 ↑1.3
Influence→random 53.7±0.2 0.035 4.3 ↑3.7
w/odependencycoupling 56.9±0.2 0.011 1.0 ↑0.4
w/overificationgate 54.6±0.2 0.025 3.3 ↑2.8
Recryst.cap0% 51.4±0.2 0.071 6.5 ↑5.9
Recryst.cap5% 55.9±0.2 0.010 2.1 ↑1.4
Recryst.cap20% 57.1±0.1 0.013 0.9 ↑0.3
LadderK=2 54.3±0.2 0.024 3.5 ↑3.0
LadderK=3 56.6±0.3 0.011 1.5 ↑0.8
LadderK=6 57.2±0.1 0.015 0.7 ↑0.1
TABLE5
Backbonesweep(averagesoverSF,ALFWorld,andSynDrift;five
seedsupto14B,threeabove):restoredcapabilityandhysteresisarea
permodelscale.∆istheCrystalMemgainoverCURATORatthe
samebackbone.
LRU CURATOR CrystalMem
Backbone Avg ¯H Avg ¯H Avg ¯H ∆
Qwen2.5-3B 39.0 0.240 52.6 0.093 60.3 0.012 ↑7.6
Qwen2.5-7B 46.9 0.213 60.7 0.080 68.4 0.014 ↑7.7
Qwen2.5-14B 50.0 0.203 63.8 0.079 71.3 0.013 ↑7.5
Qwen2.5-32B 51.7 0.196 65.9 0.076 73.2 0.010 ↑7.3
Qwen2.5-72B 53.8 0.195 67.7 0.075 75.6 0.011 ↑7.9
Llama-3.3-70B 52.9 0.197 66.8 0.076 74.1 0.012 ↑7.3
atthepointofvanishingmarginalreturn.Figure7plotsboth
sweepsperenvironment.Thekneeatthedeployedcapand
theplateaupast fourstatesappear ineveryenvironment,
notonlyinthemean.
Table 5 repeats the cycle on six backbones spanning
Qwen2.5 [69] from3Bto72BandLlama-3.3-70B[71], on
theSF,ALFWorld, andSynDrift subset.Hysteresis isnot
a7Bartifact:LRU’sareastaysbetween0.195and0.240at
everyscale.Scalealsodoesnotclosetheloopbyitself.The
strongest binarybaselinestill forfeits7.5–7.9pponevery
backbone.CrystalMemholdsitsareaatorbelow0.014and
itsdeficitatorbelow0.5pponallsixscales,withasteady
+7.3to+7.9ppmarginover it.The3Browsupports the
deploymentpremiseofSec.5.6:themarginsurvivesatedge
scale.
Thedesigndoesnotdependonthesevenenvironments
usedfor tuning.Witheveryhyper-parameter frozen, one
cycleonBabyAI [72], anagentic streamoutside that set,
leavesCrystalMemwitha1.5ppresidualdeficitanda0.011
looparea,against5.5ppand0.069forthestrongestbinary
baselineand17.2ppand0.199 for recencyeviction. The
familyorderingisunchanged.
PREPRINT 10
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Stage
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
Store fraction
Full
Compressed
Skeletal
Trace
(a)Fidelitycomposition-2 0 2 4 6
Influence estimate-2
0
2
4
6
Leave-one-out delta (pp)
SF
LoCoMo
ALFWorld
(b)Influenceestimator SF
TTL
LoCoMo
LME
ALF
Web
Syn
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Rejection rate
Compressed
Skeletal
Trace
(c)Verificationgate
0 10 20 30
Predicted lower bound (pp)
0
10
20
30
Measured deficit (pp)
LRU
Expiry
Random
CURATOR
A-MAC
AgeMem
RecMem
(d)Deficitbound
Fig.6.Mechanismvalidationonlivecycles(seedmeans).(a)Fidelitycompositionof thestoreperstage.(b)Influenceestimateagainst leave-one
outgroundtruth,withalinearfit.(c)Verificationrejectionratebyoriginstateandenvironment.(d)Measureddeficitagainst theestimatedboundof
Proposition3forthesevenbinarypolicies;pointsabovethegraydiagonalsatisfythebound.
0 5 10 20
Compute cap (%)-2
0
2
4
6
8
Residual deficit (pp)
SF
TTL
LoCoMo
LME
ALF
Web
Syn
Mean
(a)Computecap
2 3 4 6
Ladder depth
0
1
2
3
4
Residual deficit (pp)
SF
TTL
LoCoMo
LME
ALF
Web
Syn
Mean
(b)Ladderdepth
Fig. 7.Design-parameter sweeps (seedmeans). Thincurves: single
environments; thick: theseven-environmentmean;dottedvertical: the
deployeddefault.
TABLE6
Multi-tenantcrystallization(threeseeds):shareofwindowsthatviolate
theper-tenantfloor,bytenantcount.∆isthereduction
CrystalMem-SLOdeliversatN=8,computedonunroundedrates;ms
istheallocatordecisiontimeatN=4.PooledJainfairnessisat least
0.999foreverypolicyandtenantcount.
SLOviolations↓
Policy N=2 N=4 N=8 ∆ ms
LRU-fair 31% 38% 62% ↑56 3
CURATOR-fair 17% 31% 47% ↑40 4
CrystalMem-fair 8% 14% 26% ↑20 8
CrystalMem-SLO(Ours) 3% 3% 6%–24
5.5 Fidelity-SLOMulti-TenantCrystallization
Wenext shareonememorypool amongN tenantswith
independentstreamsdrawnfromthesevenenvironments,
on a single vLLMinstance. The pool is provisioned at
N×40%ofB0,squeezedtohalfforsustainedwindows,and
thenreleased,withsixwindowsperrun.Atenant’sservice
levelobjective(SLO)holdsinawindowifitscapabilitystays
within2ppofitssolocapabilityatthesamebudget.Table6
compares fairsplittingofeachstorewiththeCrystalMem
allocator,whichsteersthepooltowardtenantsnearesttheir
floor.
Crystallization improves sharingbeforeanyallocation
intelligence isadded. Fair splittingof acrystallizedstore
violates13.9%ofwindowsatN=4, comparedwith30.6%
forCURATORand37.5%for LRU, because a squeezed
tenantkeepsresiduestorecoverfrom.Everypolicyinthis
TABLE7
EdgedeploymentontheJetsontestbed(twoOrinagents,ALFWorld
andSynDrift,threeseeds):residualdeficit(pp),recrystallizationlatency
p50/p95(ms),per-stageedge–cloudsynchronization(MB),foreground
blocking,andper-stageenergy(J).
Policy ¯D↓ p50/p95 Sync↓ Block↓ Energy
LRU 9.1–16.0 0.2% 491
CURATOR 6.1–16.9 0.2% 463
CrystalMem(Ours) 2.0 586/2007 3.4 2.9% 479
experiment isbyte-fair (Jain≥0.999); theviolationscome
fromwhat thebytes canrebuild, not fromhowtheyare
split. The SLO-aware allocator drops violations to2.8%,
withdecisions in24msonaverageand42msmaximum,
wellunderonepercentof awindow.Densitywidens the
separation: thegapoverCURATOR-fairgrows from14to
28to40ppasNgoes2→8,andatN=8recencyeviction
violates62%ofwindows.Sharingatdensityissurvivable
onlyforstoresthatcanrebuildwhatthepooltakesaway.
5.6 Real-SystemDeployment
The physical testbed has a Jetson AGX Thor 128GB
hub servingQwen2.5-7B through vLLMand twoAGX
Orin64GBagentswhosememoryplanes runon-device
Qwen2.5-3B, connectedover real 802.11ac (Fig. 8). Each
Orinalsodrives aHighTorquePanthera-HTarm,whose
low-levelmotion runs ona sharedCANcontroller. The
elastic budget is the edge storagequota, cycled through
Definition1onALFWorldandSynDriftwiththreeseeds;
powerismeteredat10HzthroughINA3221.
The capability results survive onhardware (Table 7).
Figure 9profiles the cycle: CrystalMemdips deepest at
the troughbut rejoinsone stageafter the turn,withflat
latencyandblockingacrossstages.CrystalMemrestoresto
within2.0pp, comparedwith6.1pp forCURATORand
9.1pp forLRU, preserving the cluster ordering. Its costs
remainserving-compatible: recrystallizationrunsat586ms
medianand2.0sp95perentrybatchontheOrin, blocks
foreground inference 2.9%of the time, and crystallized
synchronizationmoves3.4MBperstageagainst16–17MB
forfull-fidelityshipping,a4.8–5.0×reductionoverthereal
link.Per-stageenergyontheOrinagentsisflatacrosspoli
cies (463–491J), soloopclosureaddsnoenergypremium
at theedge.Thededicatedrecoverycomparisonsharpens
PREPRINT
11
802.11ac 802.11ac
Jetson AGX Orin 1
Jetson AGX Thor
high-level action / state
Jetson AGX Orin 2
CAN
Panthera-HT Arm 1
AGX Orin 1
Robotic Arm 
Controller
AGX Thor(hub)
CAN
Panthera-HT Arm 2
AGX Orin 2
Robotic Arm
Controller
Panthera-HT (Arm 1)
Panthera-HT (Arm 2)
Fig. 8. Physical testbed: topology (top) and deployed hardware (bottom).
the energy account: recovering one point of capability by
recrystallization costs 141J, compared with 684J by re
experiencing the underlying episodes, a 0.21× ratio. A four
process tenant mini-deployment across the three Jetsons ran
the same cycles concurrently with no out-of-memory events,
per-process capability within 0.6pp of solo runs, and hub
p95 latency at 1.5× solo.
As a closing case study, a HighTorque arm driven by an
Orin-hosted skill memory runs one squeeze–recover cycle:
the edge quota falls to 25% and returns. Under CrystalMem,
the arm’s skill fragments demote to residues and recrystal
lize on recovery; post-recovery task success is 89% of the
pre-squeeze level. Under binary eviction, the demoted skills
are gone, and success plateaus at 61%.
6 CONCLUSION
In cloud-served self-evolving large language model agents,
we identified memory hysteresis: after an experience-store
budget is squeezed and restored, capability settles below
the pre-squeeze level. Deletion and one-way compression
cause the gap because they discard the material needed
for later rebuilding; we also prove a residual-deficit floor
for any keep/drop-only policy. CrystalMem closes the loop
by replacing binary memory management with crystallized
memory: entries move across four fidelity states under
a crystallization-energy schedule, demotions are ordered
by advantage-weighted influence with dependency cou
pling, and verified recrystallization recovers capability un
der explicit compute and byte caps. Across seven environ
ments, seventeen methods, and six backbones, CrystalMem
achieves the highest restored capability everywhere, leaves
a residual deficit an order of magnitude below every bi
nary baseline, and, from half the byte budget, matches the
strongest budgeted baseline at full provision. The advan
tage carries into deployment: at the four-tenant operating
point, crystallized stores yield an order of magnitude fewer
service-level violations than fair splitting of binary stores,
and on a physical edge–cloud testbed, each recovered point
of capability costs about a fifth of the energy required to
re-experience the underlying episodes.
REFERENCES
[1] P.Du,“MemoryforAutonomousLLMAgents:Mechanisms,Eval
uation, and Emerging Frontiers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.07670,
2026.
[2] B. Wu, Z. Ding, and J. Huang, “A Review of Continual Learning
in Edge AI,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering,
vol. 13, pp. 6571–6588, 2026.
[3] G. Wang, Y. Xie, Y. Jiang et al., “Voyager: An Open-Ended
Embodied Agent with Large Language Models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.16291, 2023.
[4] S. Ouyang, J. Yan, I.-H. Hsu et al., “ReasoningBank: Scaling Agent
Self-Evolving with Reasoning Memory,” in International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2026.
[5] Z. Fang, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang et al., “Shared Spatial Memory Through
Predictive Coding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.04235, 2025.
[6] B. Wu and J. Huang, “Lifecycle-Aware Federated Contin
ual Learning in Mobile Autonomous Systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2604.20745, 2026.
[7] Z. Ding, J. Huang, Y. Zhao, and Z. Cai, “Combating Knowledge
Diversity and Catastrophic Forgetting in UAV-Assisted Collabo
rative Vehicular Learning: A Game-Theoretic Approach,” ACM
Transactions on Autonomous and Adaptive Systems, 2026.
[8] C. Packer, S. Wooders, K. Lin et al., “MemGPT: Towards LLMs as
Operating Systems,” in Proceedings of the Conference on Language
Modeling, 2024.
[9] P. Chhikara, D. Khant, S. Aryan et al., “Mem0: Building
Production-Ready AI Agents with Scalable Long-Term Memory,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19413, 2025.
[10] J. Kang, M. Ji, Z. Zhao, and T. Bai, “Memory OS of AI Agent,” in
Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, 2025, pp. 25972–25981.
[11] B. Wu, Z. Ding, J. Huang, and Y. Zhao, “Forget to Improve:
On-Device LLM-Agent Continual Learning via Budget-Curated
Memory,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.25115, 2026.
[12] Y. Yu, L. Yao, Y. Xie et al., “Agentic Memory: Learning Uni
fied Long-Term and Short-Term Memory Management for LLM
Agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.01885, 2026.
[13] Z. Ding, B. Wu, and J. Huang, “EASE: Federated Multimodal
Unlearning via Entanglement-Aware Anchor Closure,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2605.00733, 2026.
[14] Z. Ding and J. Huang, “Toward Trustworthy Federated Unlearn
ing for Mobile Autonomous Systems,” IEEE Network, 2026.
[15] Z. Ding, B. Wu, and J. Huang, “SCALE: Sensitivity-Aware Fed
erated Unlearning with Information Freshness Optimization for
Mobile Edge Computing,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, 2026.
[16] C. Du, Z. Yu, H. Xu et al., “Temporal-Aware GPU Resource Alloca
tion for Distributed LLM Inference via Reinforcement Learning,”
IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing, 2026.
[17] Q. Zhang, M. Li, Q. Li et al., “MAP: GPU Resource Planning for
Multi-Agent Systems with Stochastic and Verbose Outputs,” IEEE
Transactions on Cloud Computing, 2026.
[18] Z. Fang, S. F. Hu, Z. Chang et al., “Inference-Time Budget Control
for LLM Search Agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.05701, 2026.
[19] Q. Duan, J. Huang, S. Hu et al., “Combining Federated Learning
and Edge Computing Toward Ubiquitous Intelligence in 6G Net
work: Challenges, Recent Advances, and Future Directions,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 2892–2950,
2023.
[20] J. Huang, B. Wu, Q. Duan et al., “A Fast UAV Trajectory Plan
ning Framework in RIS-Assisted Communication Systems With
Accelerated Learning via Multithreading and Federating,” IEEE
Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 6870–6885,
2025.
[21] Z. Ding, B. Wu, J. Huang, and S. Mao, “Application-Aware Twin
in-the-Loop Planning for Federated Split Learning over Wireless
Edge Networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.26105, 2026.
PREPRINT
2.5
12
20
800
12
70
Capability
60
50
40
p50
p95
2
LRU
CURATOR
CrystalMem
1.5
1
Latency (s)
0.5
1
2
3
4
Stage
5
6
7
(a) On-device trajectories
0
1
2
3
4
Stage
5
6
7
(b) Recrystallization latency
10
15
10
Sync per stage (MB)
LRU
CURATOR
CrystalMem
600
400
200
Joules per recovered pp
LRU
CURATOR
CrystalMem
0 
2 
4 
6 
8
0 
5
1
2
3
4
Stage
5
6
7
(c) Synchronization traffic
0
Recrystallize
Re-experience
(d) Recovery energy
Fig. 9. Edge deployment profile (seed means). (a) Capability on the Orin agents: solid ALFWorld, dashed SynDrift. (b) CrystalMem recrystallization
latency per stage (p50 and p95 boxes over devices, environments, and seeds) with the foreground-blocking share on the right axis (dotted). (c) Per
stage synchronization traffic; the darker segment is uplink. (d) Energy per recovered capability point: recrystallization against re-experience; dots
are environment–seed observations.
[22] B. Wu, J. Huang, Q. Duan et al., “Enhancing Vehicular Platooning
With Wireless Federated Learning: A Resource-Aware Control
Framework,” IEEE Transactions on Networking, vol. 34, pp. 1479
1494, 2026.
[23] W. Kwon, Z. Li, S. Zhuang et al., “Efficient Memory Management
for Large Language Model Serving with PagedAttention,” in
Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles,
2023, pp. 611–626.
[24] D. Kerestecioglu, A. Robsky, C. Vasters et al., “Human
Inspired Memory Architecture for LLM Agents,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2605.08538, 2026.
[25] X. Wang, S. Wang, Y. Zhu, and B. Liu, “R3Mem: Bridging Memory
Retention and Retrieval via Reversible Compression,” in Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025, 2025, pp.
4541–4557.
[26] B. Wu, J. Huang, and Y. Zhao, “From Alpha to Omega: Lifecycle
Aware Forgetting Defense in Federated Continual Learning for
Planetary Exploration,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, 2026.
[27] C. V. K. Alla, H. N. Gaddam,andM.Kommi,“BudgetMem:Learn
ing Selective Memory Policies for Cost-Efficient Long-Context
Processing in Language Models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.04919,
2025.
[28] U. Pudasaini, Z. Ding, and J. Huang, “Securing Smart Agri
culture with Communication-Efficient Federated Unlearning,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on High Performance
Switching and Routing, 2026, pp. 1–8.
[29] W. Xu, Z. Liang, K. Mei et al., “A-MEM: Agentic Memory for LLM
Agents,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025.
[30] Z. Zhou, A. Qu, Z. Wu et al., “MEM1: Learning to Synergize
Memory and Reasoning for Efficient Long-Horizon Agents,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
[31] S. Alqithami, “Forgetful but Faithful: A Cognitive Memory Ar
chitecture and Benchmark for Privacy-Aware Generative Agents,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.12856, 2025.
[32] Z. Dai, S. Deng, S. Guan et al., “RecMem: Recurrence-based Mem
ory Consolidation for Efficient and Effective Long-Running LLM
Agents,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
ACL 2026, 2026, pp. 32353–32376.
[33] G. Zhang, W. Jiang, X. Wang et al., “Adaptive Memory Admission
Control for LLM Agents,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations Workshop on Memory for LLM-Based Agentic Systems,
2026.
[34] K. Lin, C. Snell, Y. Wang et al., “Sleep-time Compute: Beyond
Inference Scaling at Test-time,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13171,
2025.
[35] Y. Margalit, N. Cohen-Inger, E. Avram et al., “Governed
Shared Memory for Multi-Agent LLM Systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2606.24535, 2026.
[36] Y. Hu, Y. Wang, and J. McAuley, “Evaluating Memory in LLM
Agents via Incremental Multi-Turn Interactions,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
[37] A. Kwon, “Reclaim Evaluation: A Lossy Memory Is Worse Than
an Empty One,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.25449, 2026.
[38] B. Wu, J. Huang, and S. Yu, “‘X of Information’ Continuum: A Sur
vey on AI-Driven Multi-Dimensional Metrics for Next-Generation
Networked Systems,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 28, pp. 5307–5344, 2026.
[39] B. Wu, Z. Cai, W. Wu, and X. Yin, “AoI-Aware Resource Manage
ment for Smart Health via Deep Reinforcement Learning,” IEEE
Access, vol. 11, pp. 81180–81195, 2023.
[40] B. Wu, J. Huang, and Q. Duan, “Real-Time Intelligent Healthcare
Enabled by Federated Digital Twins With AoI Optimization,” IEEE
Network, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 184–191, 2026.
[41] Z. Fang, S. Hu, J. Wang et al., “Prioritized Information Bottleneck
Theoretic Framework With Distributed Online Learning for Edge
Video Analytics,” IEEE Transactions on Networking, vol. 33, no. 3,
pp. 1203–1219, 2025.
[42] L. Dong, J. Huang, and R. W. Heath, “Transformer-Based Dynamic
Resource Allocation for Multi-Carrier NOMA Systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, vol. 12,
pp. 4926–4941, 2026.
[43] C.-C. Xing, Z. Ding, and J. Huang, “A Stochastic Geometry-Based
Analysis of SWIPT-Assisted Underlaid Device-to-Device Energy
Harvesting,” ACM SIGAPP Applied Computing Review, vol. 25,
no. 4, pp. 18–34, 2025.
[44] D. Pan, B.-N. Wu, Y.-L. Sun, and Y.-P. Xu, “A Fault-Tolerant
and Energy-Efficient Design of a Network Switch Based on
a Quantum-Based Nano-Communication Technique,” Sustainable
Computing: Informatics and Systems, vol. 37, p. 100827, 2023.
[45] B. Wu, Z. Ding, and J. Huang, “PRISM: Exposing and Resolving
Spurious Isolation in Federated Multimodal Continual Learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.01061, 2026.
[46] ——, “RELIEF: Turning Missing Modalities into Training Acceler
ation for Federated Learning on Heterogeneous IoT Edge,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2604.04243, 2026.
[47] Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, F. Gao et al., “Harness VLA: Steering Frozen
VLAs into Reliable Manipulation Primitives via Memory-Guided
Agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.08448, 2026.
[48] Z. Z. Wang, J. Mao, D. Fried, and G. Neubig, “Agent Workflow
Memory,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07429, 2024.
[49] R. Wu, X. Wang, J. Mei et al., “EvolveR: Self-Evolving LLM Agents
through an Experience-Driven Lifecycle,” in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2026.
[50] S. Yu, G. Li, W. Shi, and P. Qi, “PolySkill: Learning Generalizable
Skills Through Polymorphic Abstraction,” in International Confer
ence on Learning Representations, 2026.
[51] L. Qiu, Z. Gao, J. Chen et al., “AutoRefine: From Trajectories to
Reusable Expertise for Continual LLM Agent Refinement,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2601.22758, 2026.
[52] Y. Zhang, J. Shu, Y. Ma et al., “Memory as Action: Autonomous
Context Curation for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks,” in Findings of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026, 2026, pp.
19149–19164.
[53] M. Zou, Z. Guo, L. Liang et al., “Remember the Decision, Not the
Description: A Rate-Distortion Framework for Agent Memory,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.10870, 2026.
[54] A. G. Colaco and N. Lahjouji, “What to Keep, What to Forget:
A Rate-Distortion View of Memory Compaction in LLMs and
Agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.08032, 2026.
[55] X. Zhang, G. Wang, Y. Cui et al., “Experience Compression Spec
trum: Unifying Memory, Skills, and Rules in LLM Agents,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2604.15877, 2026.
PREPRINT
13
[56] H. Mi, Y. Feng, W. Lu et al., “Darwinian Memory: A Training
Free Self-Regulating Memory System for GUI Agent Evolution,”
in Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning,
2026.
[57] Z. Fang, J. Wang, Y. Ma et al., “R-ACP: Real-Time Adaptive
Collaborative Perception Leveraging Robust Task-Oriented Com
munications,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 4215–4230, 2025.
[58] Z. Fang, Z. Liu, J. Wang et al., “Task-Oriented Communications
for Visual Navigation with Edge-Aerial Collaboration in Low Al
titude Economy,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Global Communications
Conference, 2026.
[59] B. Wu, J. Huang, and Q. Duan, “FedTD3: An Accelerated Learning
Approach for UAV Trajectory Planning,” in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Wireless Artificial Intelligent Computing
Systems and Applications, 2025, pp. 13–24.
[60] B. Wu, Z. Ding, L. Ostigaard, and J. Huang, “Reinforcement
Learning-Based Energy-Aware Coverage Path Planning for Pre
cision Agriculture,” in Proceedings of the ACM Research on Adaptive
and Convergent Systems, 2025, pp. 1–8.
[61] Z. Ding, J. Huang, Q. Duan et al., “A Dual-Level Game-Theoretic
Approach for Collaborative Learning in UAV-Assisted Heteroge
neous Vehicle Networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Performance, Computing, and Communications Conference, 2025, pp.
1–8.
[62] Z. Ding, J. Huang, and J. Qi, “Learning to Defend: A Multi
Agent Reinforcement Learning Framework for Stackelberg Secu
rity Game in Mobile Edge Computing,” in Proceedings of the Inter
national Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications,
2026.
[63] B. Wu and W. Wu, “Model-Free Cooperative Optimal Output
Regulation for Linear Discrete-Time Multi-Agent Systems Using
Reinforcement Learning,” Mathematical Problems in Engineering,
vol. 2023, no. 1, p. 6350647, 2023.
[64] R. Zhang, X. Li, T. Xu et al., “Neuromem: A Granular Decompo
sition of the Streaming Lifecycle in External Memory for LLMs,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.13967, 2026.
[65] A. Maharana, D.-H. Lee, S. Tulyakov et al., “Evaluating Very Long
Term Conversational Memory of LLM Agents,” in Proceedings
of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2024, pp. 13851–13870.
[66] D. Wu,H.Wang,W.Yuetal., “LongMemEval: Benchmarking Chat
Assistants on Long-Term Interactive Memory,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[67] M. Shridhar, X. Yuan, M.-A. Cˆ ot´ e et al., “ALFWorld: Aligning
Text and Embodied Environments for Interactive Learning,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
[68] S. Zhou, F. F. Xu, H. Zhu et al., “WebArena: A Realistic Web
Environment for Building Autonomous Agents,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
[69] A. Yang, B. Yang, B. Zhang et al., “Qwen2.5 Technical Report,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15115, 2024.
[70] J. Chen, S. Xiao, P. Zhang et al., “M3-Embedding: Multi-Linguality,
Multi-Functionality, Multi-Granularity Text Embeddings Through
Self-Knowledge Distillation,” in Findings of the Association for Com
putational Linguistics: ACL 2024, 2024, pp. 2318–2335.
[71] A. Grattafiori, A. Dubey, A. Jauhri et al., “The Llama 3 Herd of
Models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
[72] M. Chevalier-Boisvert, D. Bahdanau, S. Lahlou et al., “BabyAI: A
Platform to Study the Sample Efficiency of Grounded Language
Learning,” in International Conference on Learning Representations,
2019





--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Where did the ambiguity go? Examining how
multimodal models interpret polysemous words
Jasin Cekinmez∗ Addison J. Wu∗ Raja Marjieh Thomas L. Griffiths
Princeton University
{jasincekinmez, addisonwu}@princeton.edu
Code: https://github.com/addisonwu05/llm-polysemy
Abstract
Human language is highly polysemous. Many common words (e.g., “bank”
or “palm”) carry several distinct meanings that shape what humans com
municate and imagine. Large language models (LLMs) have been shown
to understand this multiplicity of meaning, but much less is known about
how polysemy surfaces in other modalities such as images. We study this
arXiv:2608.00410v2  [cs.AI]  16 Aug 2026
across 17 text-to-image and 15 text-generation models by giving each a
polysemous word with no context to fix its meaning and measuring which
senses are produced over many samples. We find a clear multimodal gap,
where within every model family, generated images settle on far fewer
senses than generated sentences (normalized entropy 0.10 vs. 0.25), and
both are far less varied than what people imagine for the same words (nor
malized entropy 0.47). However, when we instead ask a model to list how
often it would generate outputs corresponding to each possible meaning
of a word, it predicts distributions that are more diverse than the actual
space of outputs. These results reveal a multimodal gap in how foundation
models express meaning, and how their understanding may not transfer
faithfully nor equally across modalities.
1 Introduction
Large language models (Brown et al., 2020; Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023) and
their multimodal successors (Team, 2023; Alayrac et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023b; Team, 2024),
have moved from being research artifacts to everyday tools. These systems can draft
prose, answer questions, and synthesize photorealistic imagery on demand (Saharia et al.,
2022), being used at a scale large enough to influence what people read, see, and imagine
(Bommasani et al., 2021; Eloundou et al., 2024). Thus, it matters not just whether any single
output is good, but whether the distribution of outputs a model produces looks like the
behavior of the system in aggregate (Rahwan et al., 2019).
The properties of this distribution are a growing concern. Generative models are often
observed to homogenize, converging on a narrow, repetitive band of responses and flat
tening the variety present in their training data and in human expression (Bender et al.,
2021; Weidinger et al., 2021; Anderson et al., 2024; Shumailov et al., 2024). Such collapse has
implications beyond any one interaction, raising the prospect of a feedback loop in which
machine-shaped culture narrows the space of ideas people are exposed to (Brinkmann et al.,
2023; Messeri & Crockett, 2024; Glickman & Sharot, 2025). Yet this possibility has been
studied almost entirely in open-ended text generation. Far less is known about whether the
same narrowing occurs in the visual outputs of multimodal models, how it differs across
modalities, and how either compares to the variability of human responses.
We argue that polysemy offers a clean probe for addressing these questions.1 Human
language is pervasively ambiguous (Miller, 1995), as many common words carry several
∗Equal contribution.
1Strictly, lexical semantics distinguishes polysemy, in which one word carries multiple related senses
(the mouth of a person versus of a river), from homonymy, in which unrelated meanings happen to
1
Oral Presentation, Scientific Understanding of Foundation Models @ COLM 2026
Generate an image given the following word: “Bolt”
Figure 1: We give the same context-free polysemous word to text-to-image models (top) and to
people (bottom), and compare which senses each produces. For “bolt”, every model depicts a single
sense, a metal fastener, whereas people split across the word’s distinct meanings: lightning, a fastener,
and sprinting. Text-to-image models collapse a polysemous word onto one dominant sense while
humans preserve its ambiguity.
distinct senses (bank, palm, bolt; Figure 1). This multiplicity is argued to be a functional feature
of efficient communication rather than a defect (Piantadosi et al., 2012). Within a context, the
intended sense is disambiguated. Without it, such a word is genuinely ambiguous, so any
commitment to a subset of its meanings reveals a model’s prior. Presenting the same word
to a model and a human and asking which sense surfaces turns a linguistic phenomenon
into a measurable distribution over meanings, and asking it across modalities tests whether
meaning transfers faithfully from language to vision.
We measure this with 100 polysemous words, each with a finite set of senses, presented to
many text-to-image and text-generation models across multiple families. For every word,
we draw many independent samples and classify each output’s sense, yielding, for each
model and word, a distribution over senses. The image and text conditions share the
same words, sense inventories, and judges, so their distributions are directly comparable.
Moreover, we anchor both against a human baseline collected under matched framings.
Across all models we find a pronounced multimodal gap. Image models commit to a far
narrower set of senses than text models within the same family, and both are markedly
less diverse than humans. Notably, the models are not unaware of ambiguity. When asked
to predict the distribution of senses, they estimate human-like diversity, far above what
they themselves generate. Preference-tuning a generator can sharpen it further, though
alignment alone does not explain the full gap. Together, these results expose a gap between
what multimodal models know about meaning and what they reveal when they produce it,
with direct consequences for how faithfully understanding transfers across modalities.
share a form (a river bank versus a financial one). By this criterion several of our examples, bank among
them, are in fact homonyms. Because our concern is simply the distribution of meanings a model
commits to for a word presented in isolation, this distinction does not bear on our analysis. We use
polysemy as an umbrella term for words with multiple meanings.
2
Oral Presentation, Scientific Understanding of Foundation Models @ COLM 2026
2 Related Work
2.1 Semantic Representation in Foundation Models
The representation of word meaning, or semantic representation, is a classic problem in
machine learning and cognitive science (Miller, 1995; Griffiths et al., 2007; Landauer &
Dumais, 1997; Rogers & McClelland, 2004; Mikolov et al., 2013), with polysemous words
posing a particular challenge. Static word embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013; Pennington
et al., 2014) potentially force a single vector to carry every sense of a polysemous word.
Arora et al. (2018) showed that such an embedding is a linear superposition of sense vectors
weighted by corpus frequency. Contextual encoders (Devlin et al., 2019) move one step
further by assigning words context-dependent vectors which recover rich semantic structure
(Rogers et al., 2020), although their geometry is only partly sense-disentangled (Ethayarajh,
2019). Superposition also arises in mechanistic interpretability as neural networks represent
more features than dimensions (Elhage et al., 2022; Templeton et al., 2026). Such representa
tional pressures carry into multimodal models: CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) conditions most
text-to-image systems, and White & Cotterell (2022) showed how it encodes a homonym as
a superposition of its senses. Thus, the downstream generator must resolve a representation
that is ambiguous by construction.
2.2 Ambiguity in Generative Models
Lexical ambiguity is long-studied in natural language processing, from the existence of
discrete senses (Kilgarriff, 1997) to word-sense disambiguation (Navigli, 2009). In context,
models can resolve it readily; without context (as in our setting), ambiguity remains unre
solved and the model falls back on a prior. Recent work shows LLMs struggle to model
ambiguity faithfully (Liu et al., 2023a; Tamkin et al., 2023), but almost exclusively in text.
Images make ambiguity unavoidable, because a renderer must commit to a meaning even
for equivocal sentences.
Text-to-image generation moved from diffusion (Ho et al., 2020; Rombach et al., 2022), like
with DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), to auto-regressive systems, like GPT Image (OpenAI,
2025b). A parallel literature documents failures on the compositional and referential struc
ture ambiguity stresses: spatial relations (Conwell & Ullman, 2022), attribute binding (Rassin
et al., 2023), counting and negation (Marcus et al., 2022), and sensitivity to under-specified
prompts (Hutchinson et al., 2022), now probed at scale (Huang et al., 2023). Most directly,
Rassin et al. (2022) show DALL-E 2 violates the single-meaning-per-symbol principle, ren
dering a homonym like bat as two entities at once. Kaskov et al. (2025) formalize this as
homonym duplication, measuring it across diffusion models and identifying an Anglocentric
amplification via translation. These works establish that image models can render multiple
senses simultaneously. We ask the complementary distributional question, across many
samples and matched text and human baselines, which sense a model selects. We find the
dominant failure is not duplication but an implicit narrowing of the sense distribution.
2.3 Diversity and Homogenization in Foundation Models
Language models have recently been shown to exhibit mode collapse. Jiang et al. (2026)
document an “Artificial Hivemind” of intra-model repetition and inter-model convergence,
warning that ensembles sharing training priors do not recover diversity. Mode collapse
is visible at decoding (Holtzman et al., 2020) and amplified by alignment which sharpens
models toward high-reward modes at the cost of diversity (Ouyang et al., 2022; Kirk
et al., 2024). At a collective level, shared foundation models predict correlated behavior
(Bommasani et al., 2022), recursive training on generated data erodes distributional tails
(Shumailov et al., 2024), and using the same AI assistant reduces the diversity of people’s
outputs (Padmakumar & He, 2024; Doshi & Hauser, 2024; Anderson et al., 2024).
Homogenization is also tied to bias. Models encode and amplify stereotypes (Caliskan
et al., 2017; Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Nadeem et al., 2021), and text-to-image systems sharpen
demographic skew beyond their training data (Bianchi et al., 2023; Luccioni et al., 2023; Cho
3
Oral Presentation, Scientific Understanding of Foundation Models @ COLM 2026
et al., 2023). Wu et al. (2026) show LLMs can develop novel biases through insufficient explo
ration, with newer models exercising more segregative allocation over time. Multilingual
systems stay English-centric in their knowledge (Cekinmez et al., 2025; Wendler et al., 2024;
Veselovsky et al., 2025). Such stable preferences make models identifiable, with generated
images carrying model-specific signatures (Yu et al., 2019), allowing Cekinmez et al. (2026)
to recover a model’s identity from its images with near-perfect accuracy.
3 Methodology
3.1 Experimental Setup
Our stimuli are 100 polysemous words, each with a human-verified, closed inventory
of candidate senses (the full list, for all three languages considered, is in Appendix C),
presented in isolation. The prompt is the bare word with no disambiguating context. This
forces each model to commit to a sense from its own priors, making the distribution of
senses across repeated samples the unit of analysis.
The same word set is presented in two modalities. In the image condition, a text-to-image
model receives the bare word as its prompt and renders an image, and we ask which sense
the image depicts. In the text condition, an autoregressive language model receives the
instruction ”Use the following word in a single sentence,” and we ask which sense the
resulting sentence uses. We evaluate a panel of 17 text-to-image and 15 text generation
models spanning the major model families, each tagged with its architecture (diffusion
vs. autoregressive) so that behavior can later be related to architectural class. For every
word-model pair we draw 30 independent samples.
Because the image and text conditions share the same words and the same closed sense
inventories, their resulting sense distributions are directly comparable. A difference between
the two modalities reflects how the models resolve the word, not a difference in what was
asked or how it was scored.
3.2 Models
Our central panel spans the major providers in both modalities: OpenAI (gpt-image and
GPT, Achiam et al., 2023), xAI (Grok), Google (Gemini, Team, 2023), Alibaba (Qwen), and
Z.ai (GLM). Each provider contributes several recent generations, with the exact checkpoints
shown in the figures; the complete inventory, with references, is in Appendix A. Beyond
this panel, targeted analyses add open comparison models with recorded: the architec
ture analysis contrasts diffusion models, FLUX, and autoregressive generators, and the
preference-tuning ablation pairs SDXL (Podell et al., 2024) and SimpleAR (Wang et al., 2025)
with their aligned checkpoints, holding the base model fixed.
3.3 Sense Classification
Using GPT 5.4 as our judge, each image/text generation is assigned to one of the word’s
senses or a fallback label: multiple (> 2 senses at once), unclear, or other (prompts in
AppendixB).Amultipleverdict triggers a follow-up listing the senses seen, so superposition
is quantified rather than discarded. For each word-model cell we collapse the 30 labels into
a distribution over senses. This per-cell distribution is then analyzed as we described in
Section 3.3. To confirm the judge labels reliably, an author hand-labeled a random sample of
60 English images blind to the judge’s verdict and agreed with it on all 60.
We also collect a human reference baseline from Prolific over the same 100 words (Ap
pendix G), scored by the same judge, under two framings matched to the modalities: “use
the following word in a sentence” (meaning vs. text models) and “what image does this
word evoke” (image vs. image models).
4
OralPresentation,ScientificUnderstandingofFoundationModels@COLM2026
3.4 DistributionalMetrics
Wesummarizeeachmodel’sbehavioronawordasasensedistribution: thefractionof
its30samplesthat thejudgeassignedtoeachcandidatesense,with‘multiple’, ‘other’,
and‘unclear’asadditionalcategories.Thesefallbacklabels/additionalcategoriesarerare
(6.4%ofallsamples;8.0%ofimageand4.5%oftextoutputs),sotheycontributelittletothe
estimatesbelow(per-modelandhumanratesinAppendixD).Allofouranalysescompare
thesedistributionsusingthreestandardquantitieswhichwedescribenext.
3.4.1 Jensen–ShannonSimilarity
Tomeasurehowdifferentlytwomodelsresolveaword,weusetheJensen–Shannon(JS)
similaritybetweentheirsensedistributionspandq,
JSS(p,q)=1− 1
2KL(p∥m)+1
2KL(q∥m), m=1
2 (p+q).
HereKLdenotestheKullback–Leiblerdivergenceandmisthemeandistribution.Using
base-2logarithms, JSSisboundedin[0,1]. Itequals1whenthedistributionsareiden
ticaland0whentheyhavedisjointsupport.WeuseJSsimilaritythroughoutthepaper
toconstructmodel-similaritymatricesandhierarchicalclustering,quantifywithin-and
between-familycohesion,measureper-wordinter-modeldisagreement,compareimageand
textmodels,andassesseachmodel’sdistancefromcorpus-frequencypriors.
3.4.2 Shannonentropy
Tomeasurehowdecisivelyamodelcommitstoasinglesense,weusetheShannonentropy
ofitssensedistribution.Foradistributionpoverthesensess∈V,entropyis
H(p)=−∑
s∈V
pslog2ps,
measuredinbits. Itquantifiestheuncertaintyofthedistribution:H=0whenallofthe
model’ssamplesfallonasinglesense(afullydecisivemodel),andHgrowsasthesamples
spreadmoreevenlyacrosssenses.Forawordwith|V|sensesthemaximumislog2|V|bits,
attainedbytheuniformdistribution.Becausewordsdifferinhowmanysensestheyhave,
wenormalizebythismaximumtoobtainthenormalizedentropy ˜Hdefinedas
˜H(p)= H(p)
log2|V| ∈[0,1],
sothat0marksamodelthatalwayspicksthesamesenseand1amodelthatismaximally
diverse,onascalecomparableacrosswords.Weuse ˜Htocomparesensediversityacross
modalities,againstthehumanbaseline,andacrossmodelgenerations.
3.4.3 Principalcomponentanalysis
Tovisualizemodelbehavior,werepresenteachmodelastheconcatenationofitsper-word
sensedistributionsintoasinglefeaturevector,standardizethefeatures,andprojecttotwo
dimensionswithPCA.Modelsthatresolvepolysemysimilarlyappearclosetogether.We
applythiswithineachmodalityandtothepooledimage-and-textsettoaskwhetherthe
dominantaxisofvariationreflectsmodalityormodelfamily.
5
OralPresentation,ScientificUnderstandingofFoundationModels@COLM2026
GPT Image 1
GPT Image 1 Mini
GPT Image 1.5
GPT Image 2
GPT-3.5 Turbo
GPT-4o
GPT-5
GPT-5.4 Nano
GPT-5.4 Mini
GPT-5.5
Grok Base
Grok Pro
Grok Quality
Grok 4.20
Grok 4.20 NR
Grok 4.3
Gemini 2.5 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Flash
Gemini 3 Pro
Gemini 2.5 Flash
Gemini 3.5 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Pro
Qwen-Image
Qwen-Image 2.0
Qwen-Image 2.0 Pro
Qwen2.5 7B
Qwen3.5 9B
Qwen3.5 397B
GLM Image
GLM-5.1
GLM-5.2
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Mean normalised entropy
OpenAI Grok Gemini Qwen GLM
Image models Text models Humans (image) Humans (text)
Figure2:Sensediversityacrossmodelsandmodalities,againstthehumanbaseline.Generatedimages
committofarfewersensesthangeneratedtextinnearlyeveryfamily,andbothmodalitiesfallwell
shortofhumandiversity.
4 Results
4.1 TheMultimodalGap
Imagemodelsarelesssemanticallydiversethantheircounterparttextmodelswithin
everyproviderfamily.AsshowninFigure2,thesemanticsoftheimagesgeneratedby
image-generationmodelsineachfamilyhaveconsistentlylowernormalizedentropies
intheirsemanticdiversity,comparedtowhatisobservedinthesentencesgeneratedby
thetextmodels. Onaverage, imagemodelsreachanormalizedentropyofonly0.10,
comparedto0.25for textmodels(pairedWilcoxonp<10−6). Thegapisconsistent
acrossfamilies, rangingfrom0.09(Gemini) to0.22(Grok). It isalsonotanartifactof
thewords’grammaticalclass: splittingthepanel intothe50wordsthatcarryasalient
verb,adjective,orpronounsenseandthe50thatarenoun-dominant,thetwohalvesare
statisticallyindistinguishableindiversitywithineachmodality,andtheimage–textgap
persistswithineachhalf(AppendixE).
Imageandtext-generationmodelsconsistentlydisplaylesssemanticdiversitythan
humans.Whenhumanparticipantswereaskedwhatimageapolysemouswordevokes,
peoplereachameannormalizedentropyof0.47(Figure2), faraboveeveryAImodel.
Crucially,humansshownomodalitygapof theirown: theyareaboutequallydiverse
whetherimaginingaword(Hnorm=0.47)orusingitinasentence(Hnorm=0.50;paired
t-testp=0.31).Theimage-versus-textcollapseisthereforespecifictomodels,whereitis
large(d=0.80),ratherthanapropertyofhowthetwomodalitiesarenaturallyused.
English Turkish French
Family Text Img Text Img Text Img
OpenAI 0.234 0.061 0.287 0.148 0.217 0.072
Grok 0.307 0.090 0.274 0.169 0.231 0.099
Gemini 0.238 0.145 0.312 0.239 0.221 0.134
All 0.253 0.095 0.290 0.182 0.222 0.099
Table1:Cross-lingualmodalitygap(Hnorm). Image<textin
everylanguage;thegapissmallestinTurkish.
Lowdiversityisobservedwhen
weconductthesameexperiment
inother languages. Toassess
whetherourfindingsgeneralize
acrosslanguages,weconsidered
25 polysemous words in both
Turkish and French. We find
thatthetendencyofmodelstoex
hibit reducedsensediversity is
largelylanguage-invariant: aver
agingovertheOpenAI,Grok,and
Gemini familiesevaluatedinall
threelanguages,textmodelsreachHnorm=0.25,0.29,and0.22inEnglish,Turkish,and
French,whileimagemodelsreach0.10,0.18,and0.10respectively(Table1).Themodality
gapholdsineverylanguage,0.16(English),0.11(Turkish),and0.12(French).
6
OralPresentation,ScientificUnderstandingofFoundationModels@COLM2026
GPT Image 1
GPT Image 1 Mini
GPT Image 1.5
GPT Image 2
Grok Base
Grok Pro
Grok Quality
Gemini 2.5 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Flash
Gemini 3 Pro
GPT Image 1
GPT Image 1 Mini
GPT Image 1.5
GPT Image 2
Grok Base
Grok Pro
Grok Quality
Gemini 2.5 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Flash
Gemini 3 Pro
1.00 0.82 0.81 0.79 0.77 0.78 0.79 0.78 0.78 0.79
0.82 1.00 0.76 0.82 0.75 0.77 0.77 0.79 0.76 0.77
0.81 0.76 1.00 0.79 0.74 0.74 0.77 0.74 0.78 0.74
0.79 0.82 0.79 1.00 0.70 0.76 0.77 0.76 0.75 0.75
0.77 0.75 0.74 0.70 1.00 0.78 0.77 0.79 0.76 0.77
0.78 0.77 0.74 0.76 0.78 1.00 0.90 0.79 0.80 0.78
0.79 0.77 0.77 0.77 0.77 0.90 1.00 0.76 0.78 0.77
0.78 0.79 0.74 0.76 0.79 0.79 0.76 1.00 0.79 0.80
0.78 0.76 0.78 0.75 0.76 0.80 0.78 0.79 1.00 0.81
0.79 0.77 0.74 0.75 0.77 0.78 0.77 0.80 0.81 1.00
GPT-3.5 Turbo
GPT-4o
GPT-5
GPT-5.4 Nano
GPT-5.4 Mini
GPT-5.5
Grok 4.20
Grok 4.20 NR
Grok 4.3
Gemini 2.5 Flash
Gemini 3.5 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Pro
GPT-3.5 Turbo
GPT-4o
GPT-5
GPT-5.4 Nano
GPT-5.4 Mini
GPT-5.5
Grok 4.20
Grok 4.20 NR
Grok 4.3
Gemini 2.5 Flash
Gemini 3.5 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Pro
1.00 0.70 0.69 0.66 0.73 0.68 0.62 0.62 0.67 0.69 0.66 0.69
0.70 1.00 0.73 0.68 0.73 0.70 0.70 0.68 0.74 0.72 0.69 0.71
0.69 0.73 1.00 0.64 0.69 0.66 0.65 0.61 0.69 0.68 0.71 0.71
0.66 0.68 0.64 1.00 0.70 0.65 0.64 0.65 0.67 0.67 0.63 0.63
0.73 0.73 0.69 0.70 1.00 0.72 0.65 0.67 0.71 0.72 0.68 0.69
0.68 0.70 0.66 0.65 0.72 1.00 0.66 0.64 0.73 0.68 0.71 0.71
0.62 0.70 0.65 0.64 0.65 0.66 1.00 0.68 0.77 0.68 0.65 0.67
0.62 0.68 0.61 0.65 0.67 0.64 0.68 1.00 0.72 0.65 0.60 0.63
0.67 0.74 0.69 0.67 0.71 0.73 0.77 0.72 1.00 0.73 0.72 0.72
0.69 0.72 0.68 0.67 0.72 0.68 0.68 0.65 0.73 1.00 0.70 0.71
0.66 0.69 0.71 0.63 0.68 0.71 0.65 0.60 0.72 0.70 1.00 0.79
0.69 0.71 0.71 0.63 0.69 0.71 0.67 0.63 0.72 0.71 0.79 1.00
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
JS similarity  (1 - mean JS distance)
Figure3:Pairwisesense-distributionsimilaritybetweenmodelsineachmodality(left: image;right:
text).Differentimagegenerators(left)convergeonthesamesensemorethandifferenttextmodels
(right)do(meanpairwiseJS-similarities0.78vs.0.69).
Framing Pred. Gen. Human
Meaning 0.721 0.246 0.496
Image 0.730 0.103 0.473
Table2:Predictedvs.generatedvs.hu
man(Hnorm).Modelsoverestimatehu
mandiversityyetgeneratelittlediversity
themselves.
Nevertheless,largelanguagemodelsarestillaware
ofsemanticambiguity,evenifitisnotstronglyre
flectedintheirgeneratedsamples.Weaskedthe
text-generatingmodelswithineachfamilytopre
dict thedistributionof interpretationsthatpeople
wouldassigntoeachpolysemousword.Modelscon
sistentlypredictedsubstantiallymorediversesense
distributions(Hnorm≈0.73)thanthoseobservedin
humanjudgments(Hnorm≈0.47),suggestingthat
theyoverestimatetheprevalenceoflesscommonsenses.Thisoverestimationisevenmore
pronouncedwhencomparedtothemodels’owngenerations(Hnorm=0.246forlanguage
and0.103forimagegeneration),revealingalargegapbetweenpredictedandrevealedse
manticpreferences(Table2).Thisoverestimationisoneofcalibrationratherthanconfusion
aboutwhichsensesmatter: thepredicteddistributionstrackthehumansenseordering
closely(medianSpearmanρ=0.87;thehuman-dominantsenseisthemodel’stoppredic
tion72%ofthetime,versus32%atchance),butsystematicallyflattenit,shiftingprobability
massoffthedominantsense(from0.72downto0.55)ontorareronesratherthanreordering
whichsensesmatter(AppendixF).
4.2 ComparingSenseSelectionAcrossModels
Differentimagemodelsconvergeonthesamesensemorethandifferenttextmodels
do.Givenafixedmodality, forallOpenAI,Grok,andGeminimodels,wecomputethe
pairwiseJS-similaritiesofthesemanticoutputdistributionsbetweeneverypairofmodels,
andaverageoverallwords(Figure3). Imagemodelsaremorealikethantextmodels,with
meanpairwiseJS-similaritiesof0.78comparedto0.69,respectively(p<10−3).
Diversityintextualoutputsdecreaseswithnewermodels,whilesemanticdiversityin
visualoutputsremainslowthroughout.Plottingeachmodel’smeannormalizedentropy
againstitsgenerationindex(Figure4),textualdiversityfallssteadilywithnewermodels
(Spearmanρ=−0.59,p=0.02),andwithineverytextfamilythenewestmodelistheleast
diverse(e.g.,OpenAI’sGPT-3.5Turbo→GPT-5.5,0.27→0.14;Gemini’s2.5Flash→3.1
Pro,0.33→0.21). Imagemodelsshownosuchtrend(ρ=+0.19,p=0.53)butsitfarbelow
textateverygeneration(Hnorm≈0.10vs.0.25),leavinglittleroomtocollapsefurther.
Diffusionimagemodelsuniquelysuperimposemultiplesensesintoasingleimage.The
twoLLMjudgesflagageneratedimageasdepictingtwoormoresensesatoncefor6.6%
ofoutputsfromthediffusion-basedFLUXmodels(Figure5),versusjust0.9%forevery
otherimagefamily(model-levelMann–Whitneyp=0.01).Theeffectisconcentratedin
7
Oral Presentation, Scientific Understanding of Foundation Models @ COLM 2026
Text
0.4
mean normalized entropy
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
oldest
model generation (oldest → newest)
OpenAI Grok Gemini Qwen
Image
newest
oldest
model generation (oldest → newest)
newest
Figure 4: Sense diversity from the oldest to the newest model in each family (left: text; right: image).
Text models become steadily less diverse with each generation (Spearman ρ = −0.59, p = 0.02); image
models show no trend and stay far lower. Error bars are ±1 standard error of the mean across the 100
words.
14
12
superposition rate (%)
10
0 
2 
4 
6 
8
Figure 5: Per-model rate of generated images that blend multiple senses into one. The diffusion
based FLUX models (blue) superimpose senses far more than any other image model (6.6% vs. 0.9%;
model-level p = 0.01). Error bars are ±1 clustered standard error from a word-level bootstrap (2000
resamples of the 100 words), which accounts for superposition being strongly word-dependent.
the FLUX.2 variants (7–11%). No other model in the panel exceeds 3.4%. Rather than
committing to a single reading of the word, these diffusion models blend its competing
senses into one composite image.
Modality, not model family, is the primary axis of how models resolve ambiguity. Em
bedding every model in one sense-distribution space and projecting to two dimensions
(Figure 6), the models split along the first principal component by modality: every image
generator falls on one side and every text model on the other, regardless of provider. A
silhouette analysis confirms it: clustering by modality scores +0.27, whereas clustering
by provider scores −0.04 (no structure). An image model and a text model from the same
company are thus less alike in the senses they choose than two image models from different
companies. This complements the model-specific signatures that make generators individu
ally identifiable (Cekinmez et al., 2026): in the space of which senses a model picks, what it
generated matters more than who made it.
FLUX.2 Max
FLUX.2 Flex
FLUX.2 Pro
Gemini 3 Pro
Grok Base
Grok Quality
Gemini 3.1 Flash
Grok Pro
Gemini 2.5 Flash
FLUX.1.1 Pro
GPT Image 1.5
GPT Image 1 Mini
GPT Image 1
Qwen-Image 2.0
GPT Image 2
Qwen-Image
8
Qwen-Image 2.0 Pro
Oral Presentation, Scientific Understanding of Foundation Models @ COLM 2026
colored by modality
Image
Text
30
PC2 (12% var)
20
10
0
−10
−15
−10
−5
0
PC1 (15% var)
5
10
15
colored by family
OpenAI
Grok
30
20
10
0
−10
Gemini
Qwen
FLUX
−15
−10
−5
0
PC1 (15% var)
5
10
15
Figure 6: All models embedded in one sense-distribution space (PCA; left colored by modality, right
by provider family; circles are image models, squares text). Models split by modality along PC1, not
by provider: silhouette +0.27 by modality versus −0.04 by family.
4.3 Investigating Potential Sources of Sense Collapse
Preference tuning narrows senses, but
does not fully explain the collapse. A can
Model
Tuning Base Tuned
∆
didate driver is the preference optimization
applied during alignment, which rewards
a single preferred output and can erode the
spread of a model’s distribution. We test
this with base-versus-tuned ablations on
two open image generators, SDXL (Podell
et al., 2024) and SimpleAR (Wang et al.,
2025), each evaluated over the same 100
SDXL
DPO
SimpleAR RL
0.25
0.11
0.18
0.10
−0.07
−0.01
Table 3: Normalized entropy (Hnorm) over real
senses, before and after preference tuning. DPO
sharply reduces SDXL’s diversity; SimpleAR’s RL
barely moves it.
words. The effect is clear for SDXL: Diffusion-DPO (Wallace et al., 2024), a diffusion
adaptation of direct preference optimization (Rafailov et al., 2023), lowers its normalized
entropy over real senses from 0.25 to 0.18 (∆ = −0.07), a genuine concentration onto fewer
senses (Table 3). For SimpleAR it is weak: reinforcement learning with GRPO (Shao et al.,
2024) leaves sense-entropy almost unchanged (0.11 → 0.10); what it reduces is the share of
unclassifiable outputs (23% → 19%) rather than the spread over real senses. Preference tuning
thus contributes to the narrowing but cannot, on its own, account for the full modality gap.
5 Conclusion
Whena word can mean several things, which meaning(s) does a model choose, and does
that choice look the same textually and visually? By stripping 100 polysemous words
of context and presenting the bare word to text-to-image and text-generation models, we
turned an everyday property of language into a measurable distribution over senses, directly
comparable across modalities and against how people respond to the same words.
Our central finding is a multimodal gap. Image models collapse onto a far narrower set
of meanings than text models in the same family, and both fall well short of the diversity
people show when they imagine or use these words. This narrowing is not a failure of
knowledge. When asked, the models describe a word’s meanings as broadly distributed.
The gap appears only at generation, and it is largely the same across English, Turkish, and
French, pointing to a property of how these systems interpret meaning rather than an artifact
of one language or prompt.
Viewed together, our results suggest that representing ambiguity and expressing it are
distinct challenges that are shaped by common finetuning practices such as RLHF. A model
can know that “bank” has many senses and still, repeatedly draw only the riverbank when
prompted. As multimodal systems increasingly shape what people read, see, and imagine,
addressing this narrowing of meaning becomes a concrete step towards building AI systems
whose grasp of meaning transfers honestly across modalities.
9
Oral Presentation, Scientific Understanding of Foundation Models @ COLM 2026
References
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni
Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al.
GPT-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Has
son, Karel Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring,
Eliza Rutherford, Serkan Cabi, Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Samangooei, Marianne
Monteiro, Jacob L Menick, Sebastian Borgeaud, Andy Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand
Sharifzadeh, Mikoł aj Bi´nkowski, Ricardo Barreira, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and
Kar´en Simonyan. Flamingo: A visual language model for few-shot learning. In NeurIPS,
2022.
Barrett R Anderson, Jash Hemant Shah, and Max Kreminski. Homogenization effects of
large language models on human creative ideation. In Creativity & Cognition, 2024.
Sanjeev Arora, Yuanzhi Li, Yingyu Liang, Tengyu Ma, and Andrej Risteski. Linear algebraic
structure of word senses, with applications to polysemy. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2018.
Emily M Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. On
the dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big? In FAccT, 2021.
Federico Bianchi, Pratyusha Kalluri, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Myra Cheng, Debora
Nozza, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Dan Jurafsky, James Zou, and Aylin Caliskan. Easily
accessible text-to-image generation amplifies demographic stereotypes at large scale. In
FAccT, 2023.
Black Forest Labs. FLUX1.1 [pro]. https://bfl.ai/models/flux-pro, 2024.
Black Forest Labs. FLUX.2: Frontier visual intelligence. https://bfl.ai/blog/flux-2,
2025a.
Black Forest Labs. FLUX.2 [max]. https://bfl.ai/models/flux-2-max, 2025b.
Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou, Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T Kalai.
Man is to computer programmer as woman is to homemaker? Debiasing word embed
dings. In NeurIPS, 2016.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von
Arx, Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On
the opportunities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
Rishi Bommasani, Kathleen A Creel, Ananya Kumar, Dan Jurafsky, and Percy S Liang. Pick
ing on the same person: Does algorithmic monoculture lead to outcome homogenization?
In NeurIPS, 2022.
Levin Brinkmann, Fabian Baumann, Jean-Franc¸ois Bonnefon, Maxime Derex, Thomas F
M¨uller, Anne-Marie Nussberger, AgnieszkaCzaplicka, AlbertoAcerbi, ThomasLGriffiths,
Joseph Henrich, et al. Machine culture. Nature Human Behaviour, 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla
Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al.
Language models are few-shot learners. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Aylin Caliskan, Joanna J Bryson, and Arvind Narayanan. Semantics derived automatically
from language corpora contain human-like biases. Science, 2017.
Jasin Cekinmez, Omid Ghahroodi, Saad Fowad Chandle, Dhiman Gupta, and Ehsaneddin
Asgari. ADAM: A diverse archive of mankind for evaluating and enhancing LLMs in
biographical reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.22991, 2025.
10
Oral Presentation, Scientific Understanding of Foundation Models @ COLM 2026
Jasin Cekinmez, Ryo Mitsuhashi, Addison J. Wu, and Yida Yin. Guess the unified model:
How much can we recover from generated images? arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.25254, 2026.
Jaemin Cho, Abhay Zala, and Mohit Bansal. DALL-Eval: Probing the reasoning skills and
social biases of text-to-image generation models. In ICCV, 2023.
Colin Conwell and Tomer Ullman. Testing relational understanding in text-guided image
generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.00005, 2022.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In NAACL, 2019.
Anil R Doshi and Oliver P Hauser. Generative AI enhances individual creativity but reduces
the collective diversity of novel content. Science Advances, 2024.
Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna
Kravec, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, et al. Toy models
of superposition. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022.
Tyna Eloundou, Sam Manning, Pamela Mishkin, and Daniel Rock. GPTs are GPTs: Labor
market impact potential of LLMs. Science, 2024.
Kawin Ethayarajh. How contextual are contextualized word representations? Comparing
the geometry of BERT, ELMo, and GPT-2 embeddings. In EMNLP, 2019.
GeminiTeam,GoogleDeepMind. Gemini2.5: Pushingthefrontierwithadvancedreasoning,
multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.06261, 2025.
Moshe Glickman and Tali Sharot. How human–AI feedback loops alter human perceptual,
emotional and social judgements. Nature Human Behaviour, 2025.
Google DeepMind. Gemini 2.5 Flash Image (Nano Banana) model documentation. https:
//ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/models/gemini-2.5-flash-image, 2025a.
Google DeepMind. Gemini 3 Pro Image model card. https://deepmind.google/models/
model-cards/gemini-3-pro-image/, 2025b.
Google DeepMind. Gemini 3.5 Flash model card. https://deepmind.google/models/
model-cards/gemini-3-5-flash/, 2026a.
Google DeepMind. Gemini 3.1 Flash Image model card. https://deepmind.google/models/
model-cards/gemini-3-1-flash-image/, 2026b.
Google DeepMind. Gemini 3.1 Pro model card. https://deepmind.google/models/
model-cards/gemini-3-1-pro/, 2026c.
Thomas L Griffiths, Mark Steyvers, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Topics in semantic represen
tation. Psychological Review, 2007.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In
NeurIPS, 2020.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural
text degeneration. In ICLR, 2020.
Kaiyi Huang, Kaiyue Sun, Enze Xie, Zhenguo Li, and Xihui Liu. T2I-CompBench: A
comprehensive benchmark for open-world compositional text-to-image generation. In
NeurIPS, 2023.
Ben Hutchinson, Jason Baldridge, and Vinodkumar Prabhakaran. Underspecification in
scene description-to-depiction tasks. In ACL, 2022.
11
Oral Presentation, Scientific Understanding of Foundation Models @ COLM 2026
Liwei Jiang, Yuanjun Chai, Margaret Li, Mickel Liu, Raymond Fok, Nouha Dziri, Yulia
Tsvetkov, Maarten Sap, Alon Albalak, and Yejin Choi. Artificial hivemind: The open
ended homogeneity of language models (and beyond). In NeurIPS, 2026.
Evgeny Kaskov, Elizaveta Petrova, Petr Surovtsev, Anna Kostikova, Ilya Mistiurin, Alexan
der Kapitanov, and Alexander Nagaev. Un-Doubling diffusion: LLM-guided disambigua
tion of homonym duplication. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.21262, 2025.
Adam Kilgarriff. I don’t believe in word senses. Computers and the Humanities, 1997.
Robert Kirk, Ishita Mediratta, Christoforos Nalmpantis, Jelena Luketina, Eric Hambro,
Edward Grefenstette, and Roberta Raileanu. Understanding the effects of RLHF on LLM
generalisation and diversity. In ICLR, 2024.
ThomasKLandauerandSusanTDumais. AsolutiontoPlato’sproblem: Thelatentsemantic
analysis theory of acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge. Psychological
Review, 1997.
Alisa Liu, Zhaofeng Wu, Julian Michael, Alane Suhr, Peter West, Alexander Koller, Swabha
Swayamdipta, Noah A Smith, and Yejin Choi. We’re afraid language models aren’t
modeling ambiguity. In EMNLP, 2023a.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. In
NeurIPS, 2023b.
Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Christopher Akiki, Margaret Mitchell, and Yacine Jernite. Stable
bias: Evaluating societal representations in diffusion models. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Gary Marcus, Ernest Davis, and Scott Aaronson. A very preliminary analysis of DALL-E 2.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.13807, 2022.
Lisa Messeri and M. J. Crockett. Artificial intelligence and illusions of understanding in
scientific research. Nature, 2024.
Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. Distributed
representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In NeurIPS, 2013.
George A Miller. WordNet: A lexical database for English. Communications of the ACM, 1995.
Moin Nadeem, AnnaBethke, and Siva Reddy. StereoSet: Measuring stereotypical bias in
pretrained language models. In ACL, 2021.
Roberto Navigli. Word sense disambiguation: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 2009.
OpenAI. GPT-4o system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276, 2024.
OpenAI. GPT-5 system card. https://openai.com/index/gpt-5-system-card/, 2025a.
OpenAI. Introducing our latest image generation model in the API. https://openai.com/
index/image-generation-api/, 2025b.
OpenAI.
The new ChatGPT Images is here.
new-chatgpt-images-is-here/, 2025c.
https://openai.com/index/
OpenAI. gpt-image-1-mini model page. https://developers.openai.com/api/docs/
models/gpt-image-1-mini, 2025d.
OpenAI.
Introducing GPT-5.4 mini and nano.
introducing-gpt-5-4-mini-and-nano/, 2026a.
https://openai.com/index/
OpenAI. GPT-5.5 system card. https://openai.com/index/gpt-5-5-system-card/, 2026b.
OpenAI.
Introducing ChatGPT Images 2.0.
introducing-chatgpt-images-2-0/, 2026c.
https://openai.com/index/
12
Oral Presentation, Scientific Understanding of Foundation Models @ COLM 2026
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin,
Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language
models to follow instructions with human feedback. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Vishakh Padmakumar and He He. Does writing with language models reduce content
diversity? In ICLR, 2024.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. GloVe: Global vectors for
word representation. In EMNLP, 2014.
Steven T Piantadosi, Harry Tily, and Edward Gibson. The communicative function of
ambiguity in language. Cognition, 2012.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas M¨uller,
Joe Penna, and Robin Rombach. SDXL: Improving latent diffusion models for high
resolution image synthesis. In ICLR, 2024.
QwenTeam. Qwen2.5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15115, 2024.
QwenTeam. Qwen-Image technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.02324, 2025.
Qwen Team. Qwen3.5: Towards native multimodal agents. https://qwen.ai/blog?id=
qwen3.5, 2026a.
QwenTeam. Qwen-Image-2.0 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.10730, 2026b.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini
Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning
transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and
Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward
model. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Iyad Rahwan, Manuel Cebrian, Nick Obradovich, Josh Bongard, Jean-Franc¸ois Bonnefon,
Cynthia Breazeal, Jacob W Crandall, Nicholas A Christakis, Iain D Couzin, Matthew O
Jackson, et al. Machine behaviour. Nature, 2019.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical
text-conditional image generation with CLIP latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Royi Rassin, Shauli Ravfogel, and Yoav Goldberg. DALLE-2 is seeing double: Flaws in
word-to-concept mapping in Text2Image models. In Blackbox NLP @ EMNLP, 2022.
Royi Rassin, Eran Hirsch, Daniel Glickman, Shauli Ravfogel, Yoav Goldberg, and Gal
Chechik. Linguistic binding in diffusion models: Enhancing attribute correspondence
through attention map alignment. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Anna Rogers, Olga Kovaleva, and Anna Rumshisky. A primer in BERTology: What we
know about how BERTworks. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
2020.
Timothy T Rogers and James LMcClelland. Semanticcognition: Aparallel distributed processing
approach. 2004.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Bj¨orn Ommer.
High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans,
et al. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding.
In NeurIPS, 2022.
13
Oral Presentation, Scientific Understanding of Foundation Models @ COLM 2026
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang,
Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, et al. DeepSeekMath: Pushing the limits of mathe
matical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
Ilia Shumailov, Zakhar Shumaylov, Yiren Zhao, Nicolas Papernot, Ross Anderson, and Yarin
Gal. AI models collapse when trained on recursively generated data. Nature, 2024.
Alex Tamkin, Kunal Handa, Avash Shrestha, and Noah Goodman. Task ambiguity in
humans and language models. In ICLR, 2023.
Chameleon Team. Chameleon: Mixed-modal early-fusion foundation models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.09818, 2024.
Gemini Team. Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
Adly Templeton, Tom Conerly, Jonathan Marcus, Jack Lindsey, Trenton Bricken, Brian Chen,
Adam Pearce, Craig Citro, Emmanuel Ameisen, Andy Jones, et al. Scaling monosemantic
ity: Extracting interpretable features from Claude 3 Sonnet. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.29358,
2026.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux,
Timoth´ee Lacroix, Baptiste Rozi`ere, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien
Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. LLaMA: Open and
efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2023.
Veniamin Veselovsky, Berke Argin, Benedikt Stroebl, Chris Wendler, Robert West, James
Evans, Thomas L Griffiths, and Arvind Narayanan. Localized cultural knowledge is
conserved and controllable in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.10191,
2025.
Bram Wallace, Meihua Dang, Rafael Rafailov, Linqi Zhou, Aaron Lou, Senthil Purush
walkam, Stefano Ermon, Caiming Xiong, Shafiq Joty, and Nikhil Naik. Diffusion model
alignment using direct preference optimization. In CVPR, 2024.
Junke Wang, Zhi Tian, Xun Wang, Xinyu Zhang, Weilin Huang, Zuxuan Wu, and Yu
Gang Jiang. SimpleAR: Pushing the frontier of autoregressive visual generation through
pretraining, SFT, and RL. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.11455, 2025.
Laura Weidinger, John Mellor, Maribeth Rauh, Conor Griffin, Jonathan Uesato, Po-Sen
Huang, Myra Cheng, Mia Glaese, Borja Balle, Atoosa Kasirzadeh, et al. Ethical and social
risks of harm from language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04359, 2021.
Chris Wendler, Veniamin Veselovsky, Giovanni Monea, and Robert West. Do Llamas work
in English? On the latent language of multilingual transformers. In ACL, 2024.
Jennifer C White and Ryan Cotterell. Schr¨odinger’s bat: Diffusion models sometimes
generate polysemous words in superposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.13095, 2022.
Addison J. Wu, Ryan Liu, Xuechunzi Bai, and Thomas L. Griffiths. Large language models
develop novel social biases through adaptive exploration. In ICML, 2026.
xAI. Grok 4.20. https://docs.x.ai/developers/models/grok-4.20-0309-reasoning,
2026a.
xAI. Grok 4.3. https://docs.x.ai/developers/models/grok-4.3, 2026b.
xAI. Grok Imagine API. https://x.ai/news/grok-imagine-api, 2026c.
xAI. Grok Imagine quality mode. https://x.ai/news/grok-imagine-quality-mode, 2026d.
Ning Yu, Larry Davis, and Mario Fritz. Attributing fake images to GANs: Learning and
analyzing gan fingerprints. In ICCV, 2019.
Z.ai. GLM-Image. https://huggingface.co/zai-org/GLM-Image, 2025.
14
Oral Presentation, Scientific Understanding of Foundation Models @ COLM 2026
Z.ai. GLM-5.1 model card. https://huggingface.co/zai-org/GLM-5.1, 2026a.
Z.ai. GLM-5.2 model card. https://huggingface.co/zai-org/GLM-5.2, 2026b.
15
OralPresentation,ScientificUnderstandingofFoundationModels@COLM2026
A ModelInventory
Thecompletesetofevaluatedmodels.Thecentralpanel(below)isusedthroughout;two
opencomparisonmodelswithpublishedtrainingrecipesareusedonlyforthetargeted
analyses.
Provider Model Reference
Imagegeneration
BlackForestLabs FLUX.1.1Pro (BlackForestLabs,2024)
BlackForestLabs FLUX.2Flex (BlackForestLabs,2025a)
BlackForestLabs FLUX.2Pro (BlackForestLabs,2025a)
BlackForestLabs FLUX.2Max (BlackForestLabs,2025b)
Google Gemini2.5Flash (GoogleDeepMind,2025a)
Google Gemini3.1Flash (GoogleDeepMind,2026b)
Google Gemini3Pro (GoogleDeepMind,2025b)
xAI GrokBase (xAI,2026c)
xAI GrokPro (xAI,2026d)
xAI GrokQuality (xAI,2026d)
OpenAI GPTImage1 (OpenAI,2025b)
OpenAI GPTImage1Mini (OpenAI,2025d)
OpenAI GPTImage1.5 (OpenAI,2025c)
OpenAI GPTImage2 (OpenAI,2026c)
Alibaba Qwen-Image (QwenTeam,2025)
Alibaba Qwen-Image2.0 (QwenTeam,2026b)
Alibaba Qwen-Image2.0Pro (QwenTeam,2026b)
Z.ai GLMImage (Z.ai,2025)
Textgeneration
Google Gemini2.5Flash (GeminiTeam,GoogleDeepMind,2025)
Google Gemini3.5Flash (GoogleDeepMind,2026a)
Google Gemini3.1Pro (GoogleDeepMind,2026c)
Z.ai GLM-5.1 (Z.ai,2026a)
Z.ai GLM-5.2 (Z.ai,2026b)
xAI Grok4.20 (xAI,2026a)
xAI Grok4.20NR (xAI,2026a)
xAI Grok4.3 (xAI,2026b)
OpenAI GPT-3.5Turbo (Ouyangetal.,2022)
OpenAI GPT-4o (OpenAI,2024)
OpenAI GPT-5 (OpenAI,2025a)
OpenAI GPT-5.4Nano (OpenAI,2026a)
OpenAI GPT-5.4Mini (OpenAI,2026a)
OpenAI GPT-5.5 (OpenAI,2026b)
Alibaba Qwen2.57B (QwenTeam,2024)
Alibaba Qwen3.59B (QwenTeam,2026a)
Alibaba Qwen3.5397B (QwenTeam,2026a)
Comparisonmodels. Thepreference-tuningablation(§4.3)holdsthebasemodelfixed
andcompares:
Checkpoint Reference
SDXL1.0,base Podelletal.(2024)
SDXL1.0+Diffusion-DPO Wallaceetal.(2024)
SimpleAR,SFTcheckpoint Wangetal.(2025)
SimpleAR+GRPO(RL) Wangetal.(2025);Shaoetal.(2024)
Thearchitectureanalysisreusestheimagepanelabove,eachmodellabeleddiffusionor
autoregressive.
16
Oral Presentation, Scientific Understanding of Foundation Models @ COLM 2026
B Prompts
Below, {word} is the stimulus and the candidate senses are the word’s entries from Ap
pendix C.
Generation. The image prompt is the bare word (language-agnostic):
{word}
Text models are instructed in the word’s own language. English:
Use the following word in a single sentence: {word}. Reply with only the sentence and nothing else.
Turkish:
A¸sa˘gıdaki kelimeyi tek bir c¨umlede kullanın: {word}. Yalnızca c¨umleyi yazın, ba¸ska hi¸cbir ¸sey yazmayın.
French:
Utilisez le mot suivant dans une seule phrase : {word}. R´epondez uniquement avec la phrase et rien
d’autre.
The image-framing (“imagine”) control used in the stated-versus-revealed analysis instead
asks:
What image comes to mind when you think of the word “{word}”? Describe it briefly.
Sense classification (judges). Each output is labeled by both judges (GPT-5.4 and Gemini
3.5-Flash). The image judge:
A text-to-image model was given only the single word “{word}” as its prompt, with no other context. Look
at the image and decide which meaning of “{word}” it depicts. Choose exactly one of these labels: [the
word’s candidate senses], plus multiple (two or more senses at once), unclear, and other. Respond
with only the label.
The text judge is identical except it shows the produced sentence in place of the image:
A language model was given only the single word “{word}” as its prompt, with no other context, and
asked to use it in one sentence. Here is the sentence it produced: “[sentence]”. Decide which meaning
of “{word}” the sentence uses. Choose exactly one of these labels: [candidate senses], plus multiple,
unclear, other. Respond with only the label.
Amultiple verdict triggers a follow-up:
This output clearly uses two or more distinct meanings of “{word}” together. Of the meanings below, list
every one that is actually present: [candidate senses]. Return the senses that apply (at least two).
Sense-distribution elicitation. For the stated-versus-revealed comparison (Table 2), each
text model estimates how a word’s senses are distributed. Predicting people, sentence framing:
Consider the word “{word}”. Its possible meanings are listed below. If 100 different people were each asked
to use this word in a single sentence, what percentage would use each meaning? Give a percentage for every
meaning; they should sum to 100. [candidate senses]
Predicting people, image framing:
. . . If 100 different people were each asked what image the word brings to mind, what percentage would
picture each meaning? ...
17
Oral Presentation, Scientific Understanding of Foundation Models @ COLM 2026
Predicting itself, sentence framing:
. . . If you were asked to use this word in a single sentence 100 times, what percentage of your sentences
would use each meaning? ...
Predicting itself, image-generation framing:
. . . If you were asked to generate an image from this word 100 times, what percentage of your images would
depict each meaning? ...
Each model answers with one percentage per sense, which we normalize to a distribution.
Humanbaseline. Prolific participants saw the bare word under two framings matched to
the modalities; their responses are scored by the same judges and label set, with “a person”
in place of “a model”. The exact participant instructions are given in Appendix G.
C Words and Senses
The complete stimulus set: every polysemous word and its candidate senses, for each
language.
C.1 English (100 words)
Word
Senses
trunk
jordan
bolt
bank
pitch
bow
spring
crane
club
turkey
shot
bar
mercury
jack
mole
charge
key
watch
ring
nail
chip
cell
toast
track
wave
train
anchor
ash
ball
band
bark
barrel
tree, car, elephant, body, luggage
country, person, shoes
fastener, lightning, run, lock
finance, river, tilt, heap
throw, tone, sales, field
bend, weapon, knot, ship, violin
season, coil, water, leap
bird, machine, stretch
organization, venue, weapon, golf, cards
bird, country, food, bowling, failure
gunfire, injection, attempt, drink, photo
pub, rod, block, law, music
planet, element, god
lift, cards, name, connector
animal, skin, spy, chemistry, sauce
electric, fee, rush, accusation, responsibility
lock, crucial, music, keyboard, legend
timepiece, observe, guard
jewelry, sound, circle, arena, call
finger, fastener, succeed
fragment, microchip, snack, token
biology, prison, phone, battery, spreadsheet
bread, tribute, doomed
path, railroad, song, follow, athletics
water, gesture, physics, surge
railway, teach, gown, sequence
ship, news, secure
residue, tree
sphere, dance, fun
music, strip, unite, frequency
dog, tree, ship
cask, gun, oil
18
OralPresentation,ScientificUnderstandingofFoundationModels@COLM2026
Word Senses
basket container,basketball
bass sound,fish,instrument
batter baseball,cooking,beat
beam light,support,smile,transmit
bench seat,sports,court,workbench
block solid,obstruct,city
bowl dish,roll,stadium
box container,fight,rectangle
brush tool,touch,shrubs
buck deer,dollar,resist
button fastener,press,badge
cane stick,plant,beat
cape cloak,land
capital city,money,letter,punishment
case container,legal,instance,investigation
chest body,box
coach trainer,vehicle,tutor,class
cobbler shoemaker,dessert
apple fruit,company
amazon river,rainforest,company,warrior
mars planet,god,candy
jaguar animal,car
mustang horse,car
cobra snake,yoga
python snake,language
fox animal,cunning,network
cardinal bird,clergy,main,number
ram sheep,force,memory
paddle oar,bat,wade
staple fastener,essential
pitcher baseball, jug
shuttle transport,spacecraft,badminton,weaving
tap faucet,hit,dance,access
drill tool,exercise,military
pump device,shoe,inflate
socket outlet, joint,tool
switch control,change,rod
iron metal,appliance,press,golf
crown headwear,top,monarchy
scale weigh,skin,music,size,climb
plane aircraft,surface,tool
fan cooling,admirer,spread
bridge crossing,cardgame,nose,ship
port harbor,left,wine,connector
lodge cabin,file,stuck
mine excavation,explosive,possessive
grave burial,serious
cast actors,throw,medical,mold
press media,push,printing
post mail,pole, job,publish,station
tip gratuity,point,advice,tilt
will volition,testament,future
file document,submit,tool,line
mortar cement,bowl,weapon
hide conceal,skin
tank container,vehicle,fail
seal animal,close,stamp
19
OralPresentation,ScientificUnderstandingofFoundationModels@COLM2026
Word Senses
strike hit,labor,baseball,bowling
stock shares,supply,broth,livestock
bug insect,defect,annoy,surveillance
fly insect,travel,zipper
bat animal,sports,hit
pen writing,enclosure,prison
pool swimming,billiards,shared,puddle
rock stone,music,sway
fire flames,dismiss,shoot
match firestick,contest,pairing
tie necktie,fasten,draw,bond
C.2 Turkish(25words)
Word Senses
y¨ uz face,hundred,swim,surface
yaz summer,write
g¨ ul rose,laugh
dolu full,hail
ay moon,month
kaz goose,dig
ba˘ g vineyard,bond,tie
kol arm,sleeve,branch
bas¸ head,beginning,chief
ocak january,stove,quarry
koy bay,put
fis¸ plug,receipt,chip
halka ring,public
yıldız celestial,celebrity,symbol
ac¸ hungry,open
sac¸ hair,scatter,sheet
sa˘ g right,alive
diz knee,lineup
c¸almak steal,play,ring
bo˘ gaz throat,strait
c¸ene chin,chatter
k¨ ok root,origin,math
dal branch,dive,field
acı pain,spicy,bitter
kaymak slip,cream
C.3 French(25words)
Word Senses
trombone instrument,paperclip
souris animal,computer
timbre stamp,tone,buzzer
chaˆ ıne chain,channel,range,assembly
avocat lawyer,avocado
pile battery,stack,heads,exactly
cl´ e key,wrench,clef
bouchon cork, jam,bistro
rˋ egle ruler,rule,period
20
OralPresentation,ScientificUnderstandingofFoundationModels@COLM2026
Word Senses
cadre frame,context,executive
fˋ eve bean,trinket
mine expression,mine,lead,landmine
toile canvas,cloth,web,internet
prise outlet,grip,catch,dose
pont bridge,deck,weekend
coup blow,attempt,coup
batterie drums,battery,cookware
filet net,fillet,trickle
fort strong,loud,fort,skilled
gomme eraser,gum,rubber
planche plank,plate,exercise
canon cannon,standard,barrel,gorgeous
pouce thumb,inch,truce
chouette owl,cool
vase vase,mud
D Per-ModelDiversityandFallbackRates
Normalizedentropyoverrealsenses(Hnorm,fallbackexcluded)andthefractionofoutputs
assignedeachfallbacklabel,multiple(twoormoresensesatonce),unclear,other,and
theirtotal,permodelandforthehumanbaselines. Imagemodelscarrymorefallbackmass
thantextmodels;notablytheunclearshareissmalleverywhere,andhumans’fallbackis
dominatedbymultiple(peoplepicturingseveralsenses)ratherthanunclear.
Model Hnorm Mult.% Uncl.% Other% All%
Imagegeneration
GPTImage1 0.075 0.3 1.4 2.5 4.2
GPTImage1Mini 0.058 0.4 1.4 2.8 4.5
GPTImage1.5 0.063 0.4 2.5 4.4 7.3
GPTImage2 0.050 0.1 2.4 2.2 4.7
GrokBase 0.045 3.0 0.1 0.8 4.0
GrokPro 0.143 1.1 0.4 1.0 2.6
GrokQuality 0.081 1.2 0.3 1.0 2.5
Gemini2.5Flash 0.132 0.8 0.3 1.9 3.1
Gemini3.1Flash 0.161 1.2 0.0 1.6 2.8
Gemini3Pro 0.142 3.4 0.1 0.8 4.4
Qwen-Image 0.070 0.0 7.4 9.8 17.2
Qwen-Image2.0 0.133 0.2 15.3 14.4 29.9
Qwen-Image2.0Pro 0.098 0.0 3.5 5.3 8.9
FLUX.1.1Pro 0.129 0.6 4.1 5.8 10.4
FLUX.2Flex 0.113 8.0 0.2 1.0 9.2
FLUX.2Pro 0.130 7.4 0.4 0.9 8.7
FLUX.2Max 0.136 10.5 0.3 0.7 11.5
Textgeneration
GPT-3.5Turbo 0.266 0.5 0.5 3.0 4.0
GPT-4o 0.297 0.7 0.2 3.0 3.9
GPT-5 0.323 0.4 0.0 3.2 3.7
GPT-5.4Nano 0.166 0.3 0.7 4.6 5.6
GPT-5.4Mini 0.219 0.6 0.7 4.6 5.8
GPT-5.5 0.136 0.1 0.6 2.1 2.8
Grok4.20 0.363 0.4 0.4 6.1 6.9
Grok4.20NR 0.272 0.2 0.7 5.2 6.1
Grok4.3 0.286 0.2 0.0 2.6 2.8
Gemini2.5Flash 0.330 0.6 0.0 5.6 6.2
Gemini3.5Flash 0.173 0.0 0.0 2.8 2.8
Gemini3.1Pro 0.210 0.0 0.0 3.7 3.7
21
Oral Presentation, Scientific Understanding of Foundation Models @ COLM 2026
Model
Hnorm Mult.% Uncl.% Other% All%
Qwen2.5 7B
Qwen3.5 9B
Qwen3.5 397B
GLM-5.1
GLM-5.2
0.212
0.217
0.212
0.274
0.286
0.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.3
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
5.7
3.1
2.9
3.8
3.3
7.6
3.2
2.9
3.8
3.3
Humans
Humans(image)
Humans(sentence)
0.473
0.496
8.7
2.5
1.2
0.9
4.5
5.5
14.4
8.9
E Part-of-Speech Robustness
Our word panel is noun-heavy, which raises the concern that the multimodal gap might
be driven by words that afford a salient verb reading (e.g., bolt, charge, spring), for which
the image and text modalities could behave differently. To rule this out, we split the 100
English words into two halves: the 50 that carry a clear non-noun sense—45 with a common
verb sense, three adjectives (key, cardinal, grave), one pronoun (mine), and one auxiliary
(will)—and the 50 that are noun-dominant. The split is defined at the level of the word,
i.e., whether the form affords a non-noun reading at all, not the sense that any individual
sample happened to realize.
The two halves are statistically indistinguishable in sense diversity within each modality.
Image models reach Hnorm = 0.13 on both halves (Mann–Whitney U-test, p = 0.52, Cohen’s
d = −0.06), and text models reach 0.27 on the verb-capable half versus 0.25 on the noun
dominant half (p = 0.52, d = +0.12). If anything, the direction runs opposite to the concern:
verb-capable words are marginally more diverse in text, not less. Crucially, the multimodal
gap holds within each half: image entropy falls well below text entropy for the verb-capable
words (0.13 vs. 0.27; paired Wilcoxon p < 10−4) and for the noun-dominant words (0.14
vs. 0.25; p < 10−5) alike. The gap is therefore a property of the two modalities, not of the
grammatical class of the probe words.
F Ordering versus Calibration in Predicted Distributions
When asked to predict the distribution of senses people assign to a word, models report
distributions far more diverse than either human judgments or their own generations
(Table 2). This overestimation could arise in two distinct ways: the model may correctly
identify which senses are common and merely assign them probabilities that are too even (a
calibration error), or it may misjudge which senses dominate in the first place (an ordering
error). We separate the two by comparing each of the 15 text models’ predicted meaning
distribution against the human meaning distribution for the same word, across 1,313 model
word pairs.
The ordering is largely correct. Predicted and human distributions rank senses in close
agreement (median Spearman ρ = 0.87, mean 0.70; positive for 94% of words, p ≈ 10−165),
and the model’s most-probable sense coincides with the human-dominant sense 72% of
the time, against a chance rate of 32%; the human-dominant sense falls within the model’s
top two predictions 92% of the time. This holds for every model individually (all median
ρ ≥0.67, all top-1 concordance ≥ 0.63).
What the models get wrong is the magnitude. Their predicted distributions are systemati
cally flatter than reality, placing only 0.55 of the probability mass on the dominant sense
where humans place 0.72, and inflating entropy by +0.40 bits. Because entropy is invariant
to how the senses are ordered, this flattening—not any reshuffling of ranks—is by construc
tion the entire source of the overdiversity. Consistent with this, the inflation persists even
on the words where the model ranks the dominant sense correctly (+0.47 bits), and is if
anything larger there than on the words it ranks wrong (+0.24 bits). The same pattern holds
when the reference is the model’s own generated distribution rather than the human one
22
Oral Presentation, Scientific Understanding of Foundation Models @ COLM 2026
(top-1 concordance 0.69, median ρ = 0.80), where the flattening is larger still (+0.81 bits;
mass on the dominant sense 0.53 versus 0.86). Models thus know which senses are common
and which are rare; they overestimate diversity by assigning those senses probabilities that
are too uniform, not by mistaking which sense dominates.
G Human Study
Recruitment. WecollectedthehumanbaselineonProlificoverthesame100Englishwords.
In total, 540 participants completed the study in June 2026, recruited as fluent English
speakers with a minimum approval rate of 99% and at least 50 prior Prolific submissions.
We placed no restriction on country of residence.
Task. Each participant responded to five polysemous words. In the meaning condition
they wrote a sentence, “Use the word ‘{word}’ in a sentence that clearly shows its meaning. Avoid
vague sentences that could fit any word.”; in the image condition they described the image the
word brings to mind, “What image comes to mind when you think of the word ‘{word}’? Describe
it briefly.” Participants spent a median of 34 seconds per word. This yielded 2,782 responses
(1,393 sentence, 1,389 image), about 14 per word per condition.
Scoring. Responses were classified into each word’s candidate senses by the same judge
(GPT-5.4) used for the models, with the prompt referring to “a person” rather than “a model”
(Appendix B).
2



______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Diagnose Before You Compress:
Prediction-Independent Bottleneck Witness Refinement
for LLM Serving Traces
Liming Liu1, Chao Hu1, Mingfei Lu2, Cong Tan3, Yiwei Ge1, Chijin Zhou4, Yongjun Xie1,
Runzhe Wang5, Xiaohai Shi5, and Heyuan Shi1
1Central South University, Changsha, China
2University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia
3Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing, China
4East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
5Alibaba Group, China
arXiv:2608.00423v1  [cs.AI]  1 Aug 2026
1 {244512048,8206240605}@csu.edu.cn, huchao@csu.edu.cn, xieyongjun@csu.edu.cn, hey.shi@foxmail.com,
mingfei.lu@student.uts.edu.au, 2024210516076@stu.cqnu.edu.cn, cjzhou@sei.ecnu.edu.cn,
{runzhe.wrz,xiaohai.sxh}@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract
Production LLM serving generates millions of diverse requests, making full-trace replay across serving
configurations increasingly expensive. Existing trace reduction methods mainly preserve workload distri
butions or representative requests, but bottleneck-revealing workloads may be rare and non-representative.
Moreover, evidence for one component cannot compensate for missing evidence in another, while using
predicted bottlenecks as target truth creates circular evaluation. These limitations make it necessary to
preserve evidence for every bottleneck component rather than rely on workload representativeness alone.
We propose Bottleneck-Preserving Witnessing (BPW), a quality-constrained framework for compact and
diagnostically reliable LLM serving replay suites. BPW first performs Workload Candidate Nomination
using response-blind workload features and closed source-side measurements. This stage identifies work
loads that may expose scheduler, prefill, decode, or KV-cache bottlenecks. Coverage-Priority Sequence
Construction then organizes multi-component proposals as reusable hyperedges and prioritizes weak and
uncovered dimensions. Finally, Bottleneck Truth Verification derives prediction-independent labels solely
from direct target-system measurements. The verified results determine the earliest prefix satisfying the
direct two-witness requirement for every component. Experiments on BurstGPT, ServeGen, and Moon
cake show that BPW reaches the verified gate with a compact workload set and outperforms 16 policies,
achieving relative improvements of 2.3% and 16.3% in Mean prefix Macro-F1 and WBRC-AUC, respec
tively. Stage-resolved and sensitivity analyses confirm the distinct contributions and local stability of its
three stages. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/llmllmllm/BPW.
1 Introduction
Reliable testing of LLM services requires identifying a small set of critical workloads from millions of requests.
As shown in Figure 1, exhaustive replay across serving configurations is costly, while missed bottlenecks can
degrade service reliability, capacity, and GPU efficiency. Different workload patterns can expose bottlenecks
in request handling, computation, and memory management that traffic may not reveal (Sun et al., 2024;
Agrawal et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025a; Gao et al., 2024). Such bottlenecks can cause slow or failed requests,
unstable service, reduced capacity, and higher operating costs (Sun et al., 2024; Zhong et al., 2024; Qin et al.,
2025). Therefore, improving test efficiency without losing critical bottleneck evidence is a problem.
Existing work reduces evaluation cost by generating realistic workloads (Xiang et al., 2025), selecting
representative subsets that preserve overall scores or model rankings (Maia Polo et al., 2024a; Saranathan
Millions of 
Requests
Replay Across 
Configurations
…
…
AI Company Losses
Slow &Unstable 
Service
Failed 
Requests
Lower 
Capacity
Wasted GPU & 
Higher Cost
Figure 1: Practical costs of exhaustive replay and undetected bottlenecks in LLM serving.
et al., 2025; Perlitz et al., 2024; Li and Xiong, 2025), or predicting untested outcomes from a small number
of evaluated cases (Li et al., 2025; Kossen et al., 2021). However, these objectives do not ensure reliable
component-level diagnosis. Diagnostically useful workloads may be rare and may not appear representative;
for example, an infrequent workload can still expose a hidden bottleneck or failure mode that is absent from
dominant traffic patterns (Xia et al., 2024; Ma, Chen, and Li, 2025). One-time coverage is also insufficient,
because later missed positives can still weaken the evidence for some components. In addition, evidence
for one component cannot replace missing evidence for another. For example, many Scheduler witnesses
cannot compensate for the absence of a Prefill witness, because the final requirement must hold for every
component (Zang et al., 2025). Predicted outcomes also cannot be used as target truth. For example, if
the same source-side prediction both selects a workload and labels it as a target bottleneck, the evaluation
may simply confirm its own prediction rather than the target system’s actual behavior (Nie et al., 2018).
Each bottleneck component needs its own evidence. Workload representativeness alone is therefore insuffi
cient. Consequently, realistic workload generation, subset selection, and aggregate prediction may still miss
component bottlenecks.
To address these issues, we propose Bottleneck-Preserving Witnessing (BPW), a unified framework for
constructing compact and diagnostically reliable LLM-serving replay suites. Within BPW, Workload Candi
date Nomination identifies rare bottleneck-revealing workloads for verification; Coverage-Priority Sequence
Construction prioritizes evidence for under-covered components under a limited budget; and Bottleneck
Truth Verification derives labels solely from direct target-system measurements, separating selection from
verification and avoiding adaptive-collection bias. Experiments on three public traces show that BPW reaches
the verified four-component gate with few workloads and improves diagnostic quality. Our contributions are
threefold:
• We formulate diagnostic trace reduction as quality-constrained bottleneck witnessing, prioritizing di
agnostic quality over replay cost.
• We propose BPW, which combines multi-label hyperedges, weakest-component protection, direct ver
ification, and quality-constrained stopping.
• We compare BPW with 16 policies and find that it improves Mean Prefix Macro-F1 by 2.3 percent
and WBRC-AUC by 16.3 percent on average.
2 Background and Related Work
LLM serving workloads and profiling. Production traces and workload studies reveal the scale and
diversity of LLM services (Ruan et al., 2026; Yao et al., 2026; Gao et al., 2025). BurstGPT provides request
timestamps, token counts, concurrency patterns, and failure information at large scale (Wang et al., 2025b).
Mooncake and ServeGen describe conversational structure, prefix reuse, multi-turn requests, and production
workload variation (Qin et al., 2025; Xiang et al., 2025; Xie et al., 2026). Serving systems such as vLLM
expose scheduling, latency, and memory behavior through runtime metrics (Kwon et al., 2023; Ruan et al.,
2026; Xie et al., 2026). These studies provide realistic workloads and system measurements, but they do
not provide independent component-level bottleneck labels. In this work, a workload becomes a bottleneck
witness only when direct target-GPU measurements confirm a change relative to a neutral anchor.
Efficient evaluation and subset selection. Prior efficient-evaluation methods select small subsets that
preserve full-set scores, model rankings, response patterns, or data distributions. tinyBenchmarks estimates
benchmark performance from a small set of items, Active Evaluation Acquisition models dependencies among
evaluation items, and SubLIME selects subsets that preserve model rankings (Maia Polo et al., 2024a; Li
et al., 2025; Saranathan et al., 2025). Anchor-point and model-based evaluation methods further select
informative items to estimate full-set behavior with fewer evaluations (Vivek et al., 2024; Truong et al., 2025).
Predictive Kernel Herding selects workloads for accurate LLM serving-performance prediction (Aydar et al.,
2026), while coverage-based and submodular objectives encourage diverse selections (Bhargav, Ghasemi, and
Sundaram, 2024). Software-testing methods also prioritize configurations or reduce field-replay workloads
(Ma, Chen, and Li, 2025; Xia et al., 2024). However, preserving an average score, an overall ranking, or a
workload distribution does not guarantee that every component bottleneck is directly exercised. Uncertainty
based selection may also spend budget on samples that do not affect the final diagnostic decision (Sloman
et al., 2024). Moreover, adaptive data collection must remain separate from valid target inference (Zrnic and
Cand`es, 2024).
3 Problem Formulation
A small workload set may overlook important bottlenecks in the serving system. We therefore study how to
select a few informative workloads that can still reveal and reliably verify all major bottlenecks. Formally,
let W be the target workload pool, J = {sch,pre,dec,kv} the registered bottleneck dimensions, and K the
serving configurations. Executing workload i ∈ W across K costs Ci GPU seconds and produces direct target
measurements yikj for configuration k and bottleneck dimension j.
Production inference workloads are often heterogeneous, bursty, and difficult to predict (Weng et al.,
2022; Khare et al., 2025). Because bottleneck-revealing workloads may be rare and need not represent the
overall trace distribution, the objective is not to preserve a typical subset of W, but to prioritize workloads
that are likely to expose diagnostically important bottlenecks. A selector returns an ordered sequence π =
(π1,...,π|W|). After t executions, the selected replay prefix is St = {π1,...,πt}.
We distinguish workload-level proposal quality from replay-suite quality. Proposal quality measures how
well workloads are prioritized, whereas suite quality measures whether the selected prefix provides complete,
balanced, and stable bottleneck evidence. Similar to worst-group evaluation, strong aggregate performance
cannot compensate for poor performance in an under-represented group (Liu et al., 2021). Accordingly, ev
idence for one bottleneck dimension cannot compensate for insufficient evidence in another, and a replay
prefix is feasible only after all registered diagnostic-quality requirements are satisfied. Moreover, St is eval
uated using prediction-independent target truth. Proposal scores affect only workload ordering and never
enter the definition of target bottleneck labels, preventing biased or circular evaluation (Neel and Roth,
2018). Workload count and GPU time are therefore compared only among feasible prefixes.
4 Methodology
We propose Bottleneck-Preserving Witnessing (BPW), a quality-constrained framework for constructing
compact yet diagnostically reliable workload replay suites. As shown in Figure 2, BPW consists of three
stages. Workload Candidate Nomination takes the closed source workload pool, response-blind pressure fea
tures, and source-side runtime measurements as input, and outputs predicted multi-dimension bottleneck
labels together with a hypergraph-structured candidate suite. Coverage-Priority Sequence Construction takes
these candidate hyperedges, their component-level proposal support, and execution-cost information as in
put, and outputs an ordered workload sequence that prioritizes weak and uncovered bottleneck dimensions.
Training Data
A：True or False...?
B：Is he a ...?
N：where is the ...?
...
Pressure-Label Predictor
A B C D N …
sch
pre
dec
kv
√ × √ × ×
√ √ √ × ×
√ × × × ×
√ √ × × × …
Step 1: Workload Candidate Nomination Step 2: Coverage Priority Sequence Construction
Store as a Hypergraph
…
Ordered Candidates
Order
Sample
1 2 … n
C A N …
Step 3: Bottleneck Truth Verification
Target Quality Gate
Score
…
Coverage Score Ranking
Score Coverage Sample
… Order
C
A
3
2
…
… 0.95
0.82
1
2
Complementary Score Ranking
Score Coverage Sample
… Order
B
… … …
…
…
2
0 N 0.43
0.87 3
4
5
…
LLM serving 
system pre
sch
dec
kv
√
×
√
×
Bottleneck Truth 
Generation
Quality-Qualified Diagnostic Prefix
Order
Sample
1 2 … n
B A N …
Bottleneck Truth 
Ledger
i
ii
2
2
2
2
1+1
2+0
0+1
1+0
Witness-Target 
Comparator
hypergraph 
candidates
executes the 
ordered 
candidates
Any Witness < Target 
Represent as Reusable 
Hyperedges
Train Classifiers
Update Component Support
Construct Workload Order
Direct Target Bottleneck Labels
Figure2:OverviewofBPW.Source-onlypredictorsnominatemulti-componentbottleneckcandidates,which
areorderedbycoveragepriorityandreplayedonthetargetsystem.Directtargetmeasurementsindependently
verifybottlenecktruth,andBPWreturnstheearliestprefixsatisfyingthediagnostic-qualityandtwo-witness
requirements.
BottleneckTruthVerificationexecutestheorderedcandidatesonthetargetservingsystemandusesdirect
targetmeasurementstoproduceprediction-independentbottlenecklabels,abottleneck-evidenceledger,and
theearliestquality-qualifieddiagnosticprefix.
LetWsrc andWtar denotetheclosedsourceworkloadpool andthetargetworkloadpool, respectively.
LetJ={sch,pre,dec,kv}indexboththebottleneckdimensionsandtheirpressurecoordinates,andletK
denotethesetofservingconfigurations.Sourcemeasurementsareusedonlytoconstructcandidateproposals
for scheduler, prefill, decode, andKV-cachebottlenecks; theydonot define target truth.The resulting
proposal informationdetermineswhichworkloadsareconsideredandhowtheyareordered,whereasdirect
targetmeasurementsalonedeterminewhethertheproposedbottlenecksarecorrect.BPWreturnstheearliest
prefixthatsatisfiesallpredefineddiagnostic-qualityconstraints,andreplaycostisconsideredonlyafterthese
constraintsaremet.BPWtherefore integratessource-onlycandidateproposal, component-awareworkload
ordering, independenttruthverification,andquality-constrainedstopping.
WorkloadCandidateNomination
Forworkloadi, letci,pi,oi,andridenotereplayconcurrency,medianinputtokens,medianoutputtokens,
andprefix-reuseratio.Wedefine four response-blindpressurecoordinatesasqi,sch=log(1+ci), qi,pre=
log(1+pi),qi,dec=log(1+oi),andqi,kv=log(1+vi),wherevi=(pi+oi)ci(1−0.75ri).Letµsrc
j andσsrc
j
denotethefrozensourcemeanandstandarddeviationofpressuredimensionj.Thenormalizedcoordinateis
qij=(qij−µsrc
j )/(σsrc
j +ϵ)forj∈J,whereϵ>0preventsnumericalinstability.Wecollectthesecoordinates
intoqi=(qi,sch,qi,pre,qi,dec,qi,kv).Thesamefrozensourcestatisticsareappliedtotargetworkloadswithout
fittingontargetresponses.
Aneutralanchorshouldhavenounusuallyhighpressurecoordinate.Accordingly, thesourceanchor is
selectedbylexicographicallyminimizingitsmaximumpressure, totalpressure,andworkloadindex:
asrc=argmin
i∈Wsrc

max
j∈J
qij,
j∈J
qij, i


lex
. (1)
where [·]lex denotes lexicographic comparison. The target anchor atar is selected from Wtar using the same
frozen normalization and tie-breaking rule.
We next use the source anchor to construct source-side bottleneck labels. Let H denote the set of three
chronological restarts. For source environment e, restart h ∈ H, workload i, configuration k ∈ K, and
dimension j ∈ J, let ye,h
ikj denote the corresponding source response. Using the pooled source responses,
we construct an empirical cumulative distribution function (ECDF) Fkj for each combination of config
uration k and dimension j, and compute ze,h
ikj = Fkj(ye,h
ikj). The anchor-relative bottleneck strength is
de,h
ij
= 2max{maxk∈K(ze,h
ikj − ze,h
asrckj), 0}, where the maximum selects the largest positive ECDF increase
over the source anchor and the factor of 2 scales the score to the unit decision threshold de,h
ij ≥1.
A source label is positive only when the condition is supported by the majority of chronological restarts.
Specifically, ℓe
ij = I[ h∈H I(de,h
ij
≥ 1) ≥ ⌈|H|/2⌉], where I[·] denotes the indicator function. Source labels
are therefore defined only from source measurements, and no predictor-side pressure threshold is used to
construct them.
For each bottleneck dimension, BPW trains a shallow Extra-Trees classifier using the four normalized
pressure coordinates. Model selection is performed using source data only under leave-one-candidate-out
(LOCO) and leave-one-dataset-out (LODO) validation. Let fj denote the resulting classifier for dimension
j. Its source-only proposal confidence is sij = fj(qi). A dimension is included in the predicted bottleneck
hyperedge Li when its proposal confidence exceeds the pre-specified proposal threshold. The predicted set
Li is used only to propose and order workloads; neither sij nor Li enters the definition of target truth.
Coverage-Priority Sequence Construction
A workload may expose more than one bottleneck dimension. BPW therefore represents Li as a reusable
hyperedge rather than assigning each workload to a single component, allowing one workload to provide
proposed evidence for several dimensions and reducing redundant replay when multiple bottlenecks can be
witnessed jointly. The candidate suite C ⊆ Wtar includes a neutral anchor, workloads predicted to cover
multiple bottleneck dimensions, component-specific corroborating workloads, and a negative control. This
composition supports multi-component reuse while retaining independent evidence for bottleneck dimensions
and a reference for false-positive behavior. Because source-side predictions may be less reliable for workloads
far from the closed source pressure support, BPW discounts their proposal confidence using the distance from
each target workload to the source pressure support: ∆i = minm∈Wsrc 
∥qi − qm∥2. Let ω : [0,∞) → (0,1]
denote a non-increasing discount function satisfying ω(0) = 1. The discounted proposal support is ¯sij =
sijω(∆i). This adjustment may lower the ordering priority of distant workloads, but it does not remove
them or define target truth. Such workloads remain eligible for selection, and their bottlenecks are confirmed
only through direct target measurements.
Let St = {π1,...,πt} denote the prefix selected after t steps of the frozen order π. The accumulated
proposal support of dimension j is ρj(St) = i∈St 
¯sijI(j ∈ Li), and the weakest currently supported di
mension is j∗
t = arg minj∈J ρj(St). This weakest-component prioritization prevents strong evidence for one
component from compensating for weak evidence in another. To distinguish unsupported dimensions from
those that already have proposal evidence, let Ut = {j ∈ J : ρj(St) = 0}. For an unselected candidate i, its
dimension-specific marginal gain is gt(i,j) = ¯sijI(j ∈ Li)/(1+ρj(St)). The denominator creates diminishing
returns for components that already have strong proposal support, while preserving high gain for weak or
uncovered components.
BPW combines weakest-component priority, uncovered-component gain, and reusable hyperedge gain in
the following diagnostic score:

Ψt(i) =
gt(i, j∗
t), 
It then incorporates deterministic tie-breaking through
Γt(i) = [Ψt(i),−κi,−i]lex .

gt(i, j),
j∈Ut
gt(i, j)
j∈J

.
lex
(2)
(3)
Algorithm 1 BPW Candidate Workload Ordering
Require: Candidate pool C, predicted hyperedges Li, discounted support ¯sij, execution cost κi, target
anchor atar
1: Initialize π ← [atar] and S1 ← {atar}
2: Compute ρj(S1) for all j ∈ J
3: Initialize selection step t ← 1
4: while C \St ̸ = ∅ do
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
Identify j∗
t ← arg minj∈J ρj(St)
Compute Γt(i) for all i ∈ C \St
Select πt+1 ← argmaxi∈C\St 
Γt(i)
Update St+1 and ρj(St+1)
t ←t+1
10: end while
11: Append the registered negative control if it remains unselected
12: return Workload order π
Here, κi denotes the pre-specified measured or estimated execution cost of workload i. Within Ψt(i), the
first entry prioritizes the weakest component, the second rewards unsupported components, and the third
captures reusable multi-component gain, whereas in Γt(i), execution cost and workload index are used only
as deterministic tie-breakers. The next workload is selected as πt+1 = argmaxi∈C\St 
Γt(i), after which the
selected prefix is updated as St+1 = St ∪ {πt+1} and the accumulated component support is updated as
ρj(St+1) = ρj(St) + ¯sπt+1jI(j ∈ Lπt+1
).
Bottleneck Truth Verification
After the candidate order, anchor, source ECDFs, and decision thresholds are fixed, target workloads are
executed relative to the target anchor atar. For restart h ∈ H, let ytar,h
ikj
denote the direct target response of
workload i under configuration k and bottleneck dimension j. Using the source ECDFs constructed before
target verification, BPW computes ztar,h
ikj =Fkj(ytar,h
ikj ).
The direct target bottleneck indicator for workload i, dimension j, and restart h is
btar,h
ij
=I max
k∈K
ztar,h
ikj −ztar,h
atarkj ≥ δtar .
(4)
Here, δtar ∈ (0,1] is a pre-specified anchor-relative ECDF-gap threshold. It specifies the minimum increase in
the ECDF-transformed response of workload i relative to the target anchor atar, under at least one serving
configuration, required for dimension j to be identified as a target bottleneck. A larger δtar yields a more
conservative bottleneck criterion. The threshold is fixed before target evaluation to prevent target-label
leakage. The restart-specific target bottleneck set is therefore
Ltar,h
i
={j ∈J :btar,h
ij
=1}.
When a single target label across restarts is required, majority agreement gives
Ltar
i
= j∈J :
btar,h
ij
h∈H
≥ |H|
2 .
(5)
Target truth is defined only from direct target measurements under the anchor-relative rule. It does not use
Li, sij, ¯sij, a target-side pressure gate, or transferred source support. A predicted bottleneck may therefore
be absent from target truth, while an unpredicted bottleneck may appear in it, keeping both false triggers
and missed bottlenecks visible.
Using these prediction-independent target labels, BPW evaluates each prefix according to its prede
termined workload order. It does not stop at the first prefix that merely touches every bottleneck di
mension, because temporary full coverage may coexist with weak component-level recall or unstable ev
idence across restarts. For prefix St, let Nj,h(St) = 
i∈St 
btar,h
ij
denote the number of distinct direct
positive witnesses for component j in restart h. Robust component coverage is indicated by Grob(St) =
I[minh∈H minj∈J Nj,h(St) ≥ 2]. Requiring two distinct witnesses ensures that every component remains
covered after deleting any single positive witness.
Let M(St) denote Macro-F1, Rmin(St) = minj∈J Rj(St) denote worst-dimension recall, where Rj(St) is
the recall for dimension j, and let A(St) denote restart stability. We first define the diagnostic-performance
condition as
Qpred(St) = I[M(St) ≥ ηM ∧Rmin(St) ≥ ηR].
We then define the evidence-reliability condition as
Qevid(St) = I[Grob(St) = 1 ∧ A(St) ≥ ηA].
(6)
(7)
The diagnostic-quality gate is defined as Q(St) = Qpred(St)Qevid(St). Here, ηM, ηR, and ηA denote the
predefined thresholds for Macro-F1, worst-dimension recall, and restart stability, respectively. Thus, Q(St) =
1 indicates that both quality conditions are satisfied. BPW returns the earliest feasible prefix satisfying this
gate: t∗ = min{t ∈ {1,...,|π|} : Q(St) = 1}. If no prefix satisfies the gate, the selector is marked as
diagnostically infeasible rather than being assigned an artificially low replay cost.
Finally, let κtar
denote the measured target execution cost of workload i. The cost of a feasible order is
i
Creplay(π) = t∗
ℓ=1 κtar
πℓ 
, subject to Q(St∗) = 1. This sum accumulates the target execution costs from the
first workload through the earliest feasible prefix. Replay cost is therefore compared only after diagnostic
feasibility has been established. Target responses determine only the target labels and the quantities entering
Q(St); they cannot modify the predictor, source statistics, candidate pool, workload order, or stopping rule.
5 Experimental Evaluation
We evaluate BPW under diverse workload conditions and compare it against representative trace reduction
strategies. Our evaluation focuses on whether BPW can achieve component-complete diagnosis with reduced
replay cost, while providing reliable evidence for its design choices and empirical robustness.
• RQ1: How effective and efficient is BPW?
• RQ2: What does BPW preserve beyond representativeness?
• RQ3: How do BPW’s three stages contribute?
• RQ4: How stable are BPW’s selections?
Datasets. Table 1 summarizes three complementary public workload sources. BurstGPT Wang et al. (2025b)
stresses arrival bursts and scheduling; ServeGen Xiang et al. (2025) varies production-derived request shapes;
Mooncake Qin et al. (2025) emphasizes prefix reuse and KV-cache behavior in disaggregated serving. To
gether, they vary arrival rate, prompt length, generation length, and prefix reuse, which are workload di
mensions associated with Scheduler, Prefill, Decode, and KV-cache bottlenecks. Source evidence is built only
from closed history. Each policy ranks the same finite target pool response-blind and is scored on the same
completed measurement matrix.
Trace
Total
Requests
Avg. Input
Tokens
Avg. Output
Tokens
Avg. Arrival
Rate
Avg. Prefix
Reuse
BurstGPT
ServeGen
Mooncake
5.29M
3.54B
35.6K
768.4
718.1
619.5
502.1
332.2
303.6
0.51
341.4
9.89
0%
42.8%
25.7%
Table 1: Source-trace and replay-workload characteristics.
Parameters and Environment. Experiments use an NVIDIA Tesla V100S 32GB (driver 535.309.01),
Qwen2-1.5B-Instruct, vLLM 0.6.6.post1, PyTorch 2.5.1/CUDA 12.4, and an AMD Ryzen 5 5600G host with
14GiB RAM. The formal GPU is capped at 100W with 300/1107MHz application graphics/memory clocks.
BurstGPT ServeGen Mooncake
Method
Meanprefix
Macro-F1
WBRC
AUC
Meanprefix
Macro-F1
WBRC
AUC
Meanprefix
Macro-F1
WBRC
AUC
Length(control) 0.6757 0.0281 0.8651 0.8335 0.8197 0.6020
Concurrency(control) 0.7864 0.5653 0.7552 0.7567 0.7961 0.7534
Mode-k(control) 0.6653 0.2073 0.7697 0.6316 0.8470 0.8501
Pressurek-center 0.8193 0.6568 0.8436 0.6714 0.8523 0.8578
D-optimal 0.8301 0.5795 0.8594 0.7491 0.8542 0.7843
Facilitylocation 0.6558 0.6955 0.7767 0.6741 0.8159 0.7646
Weightedsourcecover 0.6615 0.5848 0.8561 0.7902 0.8710 0.8004
PKH-inspired(EuroMLSys’26) 0.7513 0.6343 0.8593 0.7745 0.8731 0.8033
GPinformationgain 0.5604 0.6815 0.6977 0.6639 0.6745 0.6342
NDP-inspired(ICSE’25) 0.6407 0.4810 0.7424 0.7684 0.7939 0.7680
AEA-inspired(ICML’25) 0.6449 0.6828 0.7420 0.7554 0.8300 0.7920
FieldReplay-inspired(TSE’24) 0.6665 0.6343 0.7688 0.7340 0.8198 0.7734
SIS-inspired(L4DC’24) 0.7401 0.7258 0.8561 0.7902 0.8710 0.8004
tinyBench-inspired(ICML’24) 0.6665 0.6279 0.7688 0.7340 0.8210 0.7665
SubLIME-inspired(ACL’25) 0.4862 0.3812 0.7621 0.7257 0.7373 0.7030
SMART-inspired(NAACL’25) 0.6615 0.6312 0.7899 0.7601 0.8299 0.7849
BPW(ours) 0.8553 0.9266 0.8790 0.8763 0.8915 0.9002
Table2:Unifieddiagnostic-qualitycomparison.BPWachievesthehighestobservedMeanprefixMacro-F1
andWBRC-AUCamongthe16evaluatedreferencepoliciesonBurstGPT,ServeGen,andMooncake.
WereplaytwovLLMconfigurations:memoryutilization0.50withatmost8sequences,and0.75withatmost
16;bothusemaximummodel lengthandbatched-tokenbudget4096.Eachcell contains24deterministic
requests(temperature0,EOSignored)andisrepeatedafterthreechronologicalserverrestarts.
Baselines.The16referencepoliciescovertrafficcontrols(Length,Concurrency,andMode-k),geomet
ric/designselection(pressurek-center,D-optimal, facilitylocation,andweightedsourcecover), information
acquisition(PKH-inspiredkernelherdingandGPinformationgain),andrecentadaptations:NDP-inspired
(ICSE2025),AEA-inspired (ICML2025), FieldReplay-inspired (TSE2024), SIS-inspired (L4DC2024),
tinyBench-inspired(ICML2024),SubLIME-inspired(ACL2025),andSMART-inspired(NAACL2025)Ay
dar et al. (2026);Ma,Chen, andLi (2025); Li et al. (2025);Xiaet al. (2024);Bhargav,Ghasemi, and
Sundaram(2024);MaiaPoloet al. (2024b); Saranathanet al. (2025);Guptaet al. (2025).Most target
distribution, ranking, or representative-subset preservation rather thanmulti-label bottleneckdiscovery.
“Inspired”denotesaresponse-blindrankingadaptation,notauthor-codereproduction.Allpoliciesreceive
identicalcandidates,sourcefeatures,costs,truthlabels,andstoppingrules;thus,thecomparisonislimited
toadaptedgeneral-purposepolicies.
Metrics.Thenon-compensatoryqualitygate requiresat least twodistinctdirectpositiveworkloads
foreachofScheduler,Prefill,Decode, andKV-cache.Wereport twoqualitymetrics,bothcomputedover
thecompleteexecuted-prefixtrajectory.MeanprefixMacro-F1macro-averagescomponent-labelcorrectness
overScheduler,Prefill,Decode,andKV-cache.Theareaundertheworst-bottleneckrecallversuscostcurve
(WBRC-AUC)integratestheweakestcomponentrecallovernormalizedcumulativeexecutioncost; itisnot
aclassificationROC-AUC.Higherisbetterforbothmetrics.Workloadcountisreportedseparatelyassuite
costandnevercompensatesformissingcomponentevidence.
DiagnosticQualityandEfficiency.Table2shows thatBPWachieves thehighestobservedMean
prefixMacro-F1andWBRC-AUCamongtheevaluatedpoliciesonall threetraces.Against thestrongest
baseline, the respectivegainsare0.0252and0.2009onBurstGPT, 0.0139and0.0428onServeGen, and
0.0185and0.0424onMooncake.BPWachievesthesetrajectory-widegainswhilereachingthedirecttwo
witnessgatewithfewworkloads.Overall,BPWranksfirstineverydisplayedmetricacrossthethreepublic
tracesamong16referencepolicies.
CompleteBottleneckEvidencePreservation.Figure3comparescomponent-level evidencesuffi
ciencyunderequalworkloadbudgets.ItshowswhetherScheduler,Prefill,Decode,andKV-cacheeachreceive
therequiredtwodirectwitnesses.Thetwobaselinespreservetrafficcharacteristicsorworkloadgeometry,
allowingdiagnostic sufficiencytobe compared independentlyof suite size.OnBurstGPT, thegeometry
proxymeetstherequirementforonly2of4components,whereasthetrafficproxymeetsall four.
Thisagreementdoesnotgeneralizeacrosstraces.OnServeGen,bothrepresentativebaselinesmissthree
components,andonMooncake,bothmisstwo.Underthesamebudgets,BPWistheonlyevaluatedpolicy
thatprovidesat leasttwodirectwitnesses foreverycomponentacrossall threetraces.Theseresultsshow
Sch.
Pre.
Dec.
BurstGPT   same budget: k=4
Traffic proxy
KV
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ PASS
Geometry proxy
BPW
✓ ✓ × × FAIL  2/4
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ PASS
ServeGen   same budget: k=3
Traffic proxy
Geometry proxy
BPW
✓ × × × FAIL  3/4
Mooncake   same budget: k=3
Traffic proxy
Geometry proxy
BPW
✓ × × × FAIL  3/4
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ PASS
✓ × ✓ × FAIL  2/4
✓ × ✓ × FAIL  2/4
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ PASS
component gate met (at least 2 witnesses)
component evidence missing
Figure 3: Component-level evidence sufficiency under BPW’s equal budget. A green check indicates at least
two direct positive witnesses for the component, whereas a red cross indicates missing evidence. Pass requires
all four components and is consistent across three restarts.
that preserving traffic characteristics or workload geometry does not guarantee complete, non-compensatory
bottleneck evidence.
Ablation Study. Figure 4 analyzes the three stages of BPW: candidate proposal, workload ordering,
and direct verification. Removing source component proposals increases the workloads required to reach the
direct two-witness gate across all three traces. Replacing the state-aware coverage order with a geometry
only facility-location order also increases the required workload count under the same candidate pool, neutral
anchor, and direct-truth protocol.
Source proposals remain informative, achieving high component Macro-F1 scores across the three traces
(0.884, 0.912, and 0.914 for BurstGPT, ServeGen, and Mooncake, respectively). However, their predictions
are not equivalent to target truth: without direct verification, a non-negligible fraction of candidates still
contain incorrect component incidences (23.3%, 40.0%, and 36.4% on BurstGPT, ServeGen, and Mooncake,
respectively). These results highlight the non-substitutable roles of the three stages. Proposals expose can
didate component structure, coverage ordering reduces the executions required to satisfy the conjunctive
gate, and direct measurements prevent source hypotheses from being promoted as bottleneck truth. These
BurstGPT
ServeGen
Mooncake
All 81 trace-specific evaluations satisfy the direct two-witness gate. BPW produces highly consistent
replay selections across parameter, configuration, and restart variations. BurstGPT shows mild ordering
sensitivity under the weakest source condition, requiring 4–5 workloads with selected-prefix Jaccard values
Stability and Evidence Boundary. Figure 5 evaluates gate-workload, selected-prefix, and execution
stability under parameter, configuration, and restart changes.
controlled stage interventions are performed on fixed measurement matrices and should be interpreted as
component contribution analyses rather than system-level causal claims.
Figure 4: Stage-resolved analysis on the same completed matrices. The upper panels remove component pro
posals or replace the coverage-prioritized order, while the lower panel reports incorrect component incidences
without direct verification. Values are restart means; lower is better.
Incorrect source
incidence (%)
Full BPW No component proposals Geometry-only order
0
10
20
30
BurstGPT
ServeGen
Mooncake
23.3%
BurstGPT
ServeGen
Mooncake
Workloads to
verified gate
40
0
2
4
4
Remove direct verification
3 3
6
5
5
40.0%
0
2
4
5
6
4
36.4%
5
3 3
6
5
Remove proposals
Remove coverage order
We propose Bottleneck-Preserving Witnessing (BPW), a compact diagnostic replay framework for reliable
LLM-serving evaluation. BPW combines candidate nomination, coverage-priority sequencing, and direct
verification to preserve component-level bottleneck evidence. Experiments on three public traces show that
BPW achieves the best diagnostic quality among 16 policies, improving Mean prefix Macro-F1 by 2.3 percent
and WBRC-AUC by 16.3 percent on average. Thus, BPW provides a compact and reliable mechanism for
bottleneck diagnosis while supporting cost-aware LLM-serving evaluation. More broadly, BPW highlights
that representative workload selection is insufficient for mechanism-level diagnosis when bottleneck evidence
is non-compensatory. By shifting trace reduction from distribution preservation toward evidence preserva
tion, BPW offers a general perspective for efficient and reliable serving-system evaluation across diverse
6 Conclusion
ranging from 0.667 to 1.000. In contrast, ServeGen and Mooncake remain fully stable across all evaluated
settings, requiring only three workloads and achieving a selected-prefix Jaccard of 1.000. Across configuration
variations, BPW maintains strong selection consistency, with mean selected-prefix Jaccard values exceeding
0.93 on all three traces. Restart evaluations show similarly stable behavior, indicating that the selected
replay suites are not artifacts of a particular parameter setting or execution instance under diverse source
and target conditions.
Figure 5: Stability of gate workload count, selected prefix, and execution pairs under parameter changes,
serving configurations, and independent restarts. Values for ServeGen and Mooncake are slightly shifted for
visibility; their selected-prefix Jaccard scores are both 1.000.
Execution-pair
Jaccard
Serving
configuration
Independent
restart
0.9
1.0
Execution stability
Selected-prefix
Jaccard
0.75
1
1.00
2
3
Selected-prefix stability
Workloads
to gate
3
1
2
4
5
3
Gate workload stability
BurstGPT ServeGen Mooncake
deployment settings.
References
Agrawal, A.; Kedia, N.; Panwar, A.; Mohan, J.; Kwatra, N.; Gulavani, B.; Tumanov, A.; and Ramjee, R. 2024.
Taming Throughput-Latency Tradeoff in LLM Inference with Sarathi-Serve. In 18th USENIX Symposium
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, 117–134.
Aydar, E.; Pinto, C.; Venugopal, S.; and Chatzopoulos, D. 2026. Sampling Where It Matters: Predicting
LLM Serving Performance. In Proceedings of the Sixth European Workshop on Machine Learning and
Systems.
Bhargav, J.; Ghasemi, M.; and Sundaram, S. 2024. Submodular Information Selection for Hypothesis Testing
with Misclassification Penalties. In Proceedings of the 6th Annual Learning for Dynamics and Control
Conference, 566–577.
Gao, B.; He, Z.; Sharma, P.; Kang, Q.; Jevdjic, D.; Deng, J.; Yang, X.; Yu, Z.; and Zuo, P. 2024. Cost
Efficient Large Language Model Serving for Multi-turn Conversations with CachedAttention. In 2024
USENIX Annual Technical Conference, 111–126.
Gao, S.; Wang, Q.; Zeng, S.; Lu, Y.; and Shu, J. 2025. Weaver: Efficient Multi-LLM Serving with Attention
Offloading. In 2025 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, 587–595.
Gupta, V.; Ross, C.; Pantoja, D.; Passonneau, R. J.; Ung, M.; and Williams, A. 2025. Improving Model
Evaluation using SMART Filtering of Benchmark Datasets. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of
the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, 4595–4615.
Khare, A.; Garg, D.; Kalra, S.; Grandhi, S.; Stoica, I.; and Tumanov, A. 2025. SuperServe: Fine-Grained
Inference Serving for Unpredictable Workloads. In 22nd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems
Design and Implementation.
Kossen, J.; Farquhar, S.; Gal, Y.; and Rainforth, T. 2021. Active Testing: Sample-Efficient Model Evaluation.
In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, 5753–5763.
Kwon, W.; Li, Z.; Zhuang, S.; Sheng, Y.; Zheng, L.; Yu, C. H.; Gonzalez, J. E.; Zhang, H.; and Stoica, I. 2023.
Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model Serving with PagedAttention. In Proceedings
of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, 611–626.
Li, G.; and Xiong, D. 2025. Towards Optimal Evaluation Efficiency for Large Language Models. In Proceed
ings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 14176–14183.
Li, Y.; Ma, J.; Ballesteros, M.; Benajiba, Y.; and Horwood, G. 2025. Active Evaluation Acquisition for
Efficient LLM Benchmarking. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning.
Liu, E. Z.; Haghgoo, B.; Chen, A. S.; Raghunathan, A.; Koh, P. W.; Sagawa, S.; Liang, P.; and Finn, C. 2021.
Just Train Twice: Improving Group Robustness without Training Group Information. In Proceedings of
the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, 6781–6792.
Ma, Y.; Chen, T.; and Li, K. 2025. Faster Configuration Performance Bug Testing with Neural Dual-Level
Prioritization. In 2025 IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), 988
1000.
Maia Polo, F.; Weber, L.; Choshen, L.; Sun, Y.; Xu, G.; and Yurochkin, M. 2024a. tinyBenchmarks: Eval
uating LLMs with Fewer Examples. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
Learning.
Maia Polo, F.; Weber, L.; Choshen, L.; Sun, Y.; Xu, G.; and Yurochkin, M. 2024b. tinyBenchmarks: Evaluat
ing LLMs with Fewer Examples. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning,
34303–34326.
Neel, S.; and Roth, A. 2018. Mitigating Bias in Adaptive Data Gathering via Differential Privacy. In
Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, 3720–3729.
Nie, X.; Tian, X.; Taylor, J.; and Zou, J. 2018. Why Adaptively Collected Data Have Negative Bias and How
to Correct for It. In Proceedings of the Twenty-First International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
and Statistics, 1261–1269.
Perlitz, Y.; Bandel, E.; Gera, A.; Arviv, O.; Ein-Dor, L.; Shnarch, E.; Slonim, N.; Shmueli-Scheuer, M.; and
Choshen, L. 2024. Efficient Benchmarking (of Language Models). In Proceedings of the 2024 Confer
ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, 2519–2536.
Qin, R.; Li, Z.; He, W.; Cui, J.; Ren, F.; Zhang, M.; Wu, Y.; Zheng, W.; and Xu, X. 2025. Mooncake: Trading
More Storage for Less Computation — A KVCache-centric Architecture for Serving LLM Chatbot. In
23rd USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies, 155–170.
Ruan, C.; Chen, Y.; Tian, D.; Shi, Y.; Wu, Y.; Li, J.; and Li, C. 2026. Libra: Flexible Request Partitioning
and Scheduling for Serving Unbalanced and Dynamic LLM Workloads. In 23rd USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation, 1243–1258.
Saranathan, G.; Xu, C.; Alam, M. P.; Kumar, T.; Foltin, M.; Wong, S. Y.; and Bhattacharya, S. 2025. Sub
LIME: Subset Selection via Rank Correlation Prediction for Data-Efficient LLM Evaluation. In Proceedings
of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 30572–30593.
Sloman, S. J.; Bharti, A.; Martinelli, J.; and Kaski, S. 2024. Bayesian Active Learning in the Presence of
Nuisance Parameters. In Proceedings of the Fortieth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,
3245–3263.
Sun, B.; Huang, Z.; Zhao, H.; Xiao, W.; Zhang, X.; Li, Y.; and Lin, W. 2024. Llumnix: Dynamic scheduling
for large language model serving. In 18th USENIX symposium on operating systems design and imple
mentation, 173–191.
Truong, S. T.; Tu, Y.; Liang, P.; Li, B.; and Koyejo, S. 2025. Reliable and Efficient Amortized Model-based
Evaluation. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning, 60238–60265.
Vivek, R.; Ethayarajh, K.; Yang, D.; and Kiela, D. 2024. Anchor Points: Benchmarking Models with Much
Fewer Examples. In Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Wang, J.; Han, J.; Wei, X.; Shen, S.; Zhang, D.; Fang, C.; Chen, R.; Yu, W.; and Chen, H. 2025a. KVCache
Cache in the Wild: Characterizing and Optimizing KVCache Cache at a Large Cloud Provider. In 2025
USENIX Annual Technical Conference, 465–482.
Wang, Y.; Chen, Y.; Li, Z.; Kang, X.; Fang, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Zheng, Y.; Tang, Z.; He, X.; Guo, R.; Wang, X.;
Wang, Q.; Zhou, A. C.; and Chu, X. 2025b. BurstGPT: A Real-World Workload Dataset to Optimize
LLM Serving Systems. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining.
Weng, Q.; Xiao, W.; Yu, Y.; Wang, W.; Wang, C.; He, J.; Li, Y.; Zhang, L.; Lin, W.; and Ding, Y. 2022.
MLaaS in the Wild: Workload Analysis and Scheduling in Large-Scale Heterogeneous GPU Clusters. In
19th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation, 945–960.
Xia, Y.; Liao, L.; Chen, J.; Li, H.; and Shang, W. 2024. Reducing the Length of Field-Replay-Based Load
Testing. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering.
Xiang, Y.; Li, X.; Qian, K.; Yu, W.; Zhai, E.; and Jin, X. 2025. ServeGen: Workload Characterization and
Generation of Large Language Model Serving in Production. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09999.
Xie, Z.; Xu, Z.; Zhao, M.; An, Y.; Mailthody, V. S.; Mahlke, S.; Garland, M.; and Kozyrakis, C. 2026. Strata:
Hierarchical Context Caching for Long-Context Language Model Serving. In 20th USENIX Symposium
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, 1–16.
Yao, X.; Jiang, Y.; Badanin, I.; Hu, Q.; Smith, R. M.; Yuan, B.; Schlag, I.; Yoneki, E.; and Klimovic,
A. 2026. {OpenTela}: Unifying Decentralized Computing Resources for Heterogeneous {LLM} Serving
(Operational Systems). In 20th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation,
1821–1838.
Zang, C.; Turkcan, M. K.; Zussman, G.; Kostic, Z.; and Ghaderi, J. 2025. Adaptive Data Collection for
Robust Learning Across Multiple Distributions. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on
Machine Learning, 73974–73994.
Zhong, Y.; Liu, S.; Chen, J.; Hu, J.; Zhu, Y.; Liu, X.; Jin, X.; and Zhang, H. 2024. DistServe: Disaggregating
Prefill and Decoding for Goodput-optimized Large Language Model Serving. In 18th USENIX Symposium
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, 193–210.
Zrnic, T.; and Cand`es, E. J. 2024. Active Statistical Inference. In Proceedings of the 41st International
Conference on Machine Learning



________________________________________________________________________________________________________



📋 Quick Reference
Technique	When to Use	Impact
Role/persona	Always — sets expertise level	High
Few-shot examples	Model doesn't get the format right	Very high
Chain of thought	Complex reasoning, math, logic	Very high
Structured output	Need JSON, tables, specific format	High
Constraints	Output too long/short/off-topic	Medium
Step-by-step	Multi-part tasks	High
Temperature control	Too random or too boring	Medium
System prompt	Consistent behavior across conversations	High
🎯 Foundational Techniques
Be Specific
❌ Bad:   Tell me about databases.
✅ Good:  Compare PostgreSQL and MySQL for a read-heavy web app
          serving 10K requests/sec. Focus on query performance,
          indexing, and connection pooling. Give specific numbers.
Give Context
❌ Bad:   Write a function to process orders.
✅ Good:  I'm building a Node.js e-commerce API using Express and
          PostgreSQL. Write a function that processes an order:
          validates stock, calculates total with tax, creates the
          order record, and decrements inventory — all in a
          database transaction.
Specify the Output Format
❌ Bad:   List the pros and cons.
✅ Good:  List the pros and cons in a markdown table with columns:
          Aspect | Pro | Con | Impact (High/Medium/Low)
Define the Audience
Tell me as if I'm:
- A senior backend engineer (skip the basics)
- A junior developer (explain concepts as you go)
- A non-technical stakeholder (use analogies, no jargon)
🎭 Role & Persona
Template
You are a [role] with [years] of experience in [domain].
Your expertise includes [specific skills].
You communicate in a [tone] style.
Examples
You are a senior DevOps engineer with 10 years of experience
in AWS and Kubernetes. You give practical, production-tested
advice. You always mention security implications and cost.
You are a technical writer who specializes in API documentation.
You write concise, scannable docs with code examples in every
section. You follow the Diátaxis documentation framework.
You are a code reviewer at a FAANG company. You focus on:
correctness, performance, readability, and security — in that
order. You give specific line-level feedback with fix suggestions.
Power Combo: Role + Anti-Role
You are a senior software architect. Do NOT give junior-level
advice like "use version control" or "write tests." Assume I
already follow best practices and need architecture-level guidance.
📝 Few-Shot Prompting
Template
Convert the following into [format]. Here are examples:

Input: [example 1 input]
Output: [example 1 output]

Input: [example 2 input]
Output: [example 2 output]

Input: [actual input]
Output:
Example: Log Parsing
Extract the error type and message from these log lines:

Log: 2026-04-15 ERROR [AuthService] Token expired for user_id=42
Output: {"type": "AuthError", "message": "Token expired", "user_id": 42}

Log: 2026-04-15 WARN [DBPool] Connection pool exhausted, waiting 5s
Output: {"type": "DBWarning", "message": "Connection pool exhausted", "wait_seconds": 5}

Log: 2026-04-15 ERROR [PaymentGateway] Timeout after 30s for txn=abc123
Output:
Tip: 2-5 examples is the sweet spot. More examples = more consistent output, but uses more tokens.

🧠 Chain of Thought (CoT)
Explicit CoT
Solve this step by step. Show your reasoning at each step
before giving the final answer.

Question: A server handles 500 requests/sec. Each request uses
2MB of RAM for 200ms. What's the peak memory usage?
Zero-Shot CoT (just add "think step by step")
How many t3.medium instances do I need for 50,000 concurrent
WebSocket connections? Think step by step.
Structured CoT
Analyze this database query performance issue:

1. First, identify what the query is doing
2. Then, identify potential bottlenecks
3. Check for missing indexes
4. Suggest specific optimizations
5. Estimate the performance improvement

Query: [paste query]
EXPLAIN output: [paste explain]
Tip: CoT dramatically improves accuracy on math, logic, and multi-step reasoning. Always use it for complex questions.

📊 Output Formatting
Force JSON Output
Return your response as valid JSON with this exact schema:
{
  "summary": "string",
  "items": [{"name": "string", "priority": "high|medium|low"}],
  "total": number
}
Return ONLY the JSON. No markdown, no explanation, no code fences.
Force Markdown Table
Present the comparison as a markdown table with these columns:
| Feature | Tool A | Tool B | Winner |

Include at least 10 rows. Use ✅/❌ for boolean features.
Force Bullet Points
Give me exactly 5 actionable recommendations. Format:
- **[Action]**: [One sentence explanation]
Force Numbered Steps
Write this as numbered steps a junior developer can follow.
Each step should have:
1. The exact command to run
2. What it does (one sentence)
3. Expected output
🚧 Constraints & Guardrails
Length Control
Answer in exactly 3 sentences.
Answer in under 100 words.
Give me the TL;DR in one paragraph, then the detailed version.
Scope Control
Only answer based on the context I provide. If the information
isn't in the context, say "Not found in provided context."
Do not use external knowledge.
Style Control
- No buzzwords or marketing language
- No "In conclusion" or "It's worth noting"
- Write like documentation, not a blog post
- Use active voice
- Every paragraph must contain a concrete example
Negative Prompting
Do NOT:
- Give generic advice
- Suggest "it depends" without explaining on what
- Use analogies
- Repeat the question back to me
- Add disclaimers about seeking professional advice

DO:
- Give specific, opinionated recommendations
- Include exact commands or code
- Mention trade-offs concisely
🔄 Iterative Refinement
Make It Better
That's good, but:
- Make it more concise (cut by 50%)
- Add error handling for network failures
- Use TypeScript instead of JavaScript
- Add input validation with Zod
Evaluate and Improve
Review what you just wrote. Rate it 1-10 on:
- Correctness
- Completeness
- Clarity
Then rewrite it addressing any issues you found.
Compare Approaches
You gave me approach A. Now give me a completely different
approach (approach B) to the same problem. Then compare
both approaches with trade-offs.
⚙️ System Prompts
Template
You are [role]. Your task is to [primary function].

Rules:
1. [Rule 1]
2. [Rule 2]
3. [Rule 3]

Format: [output format]
Tone: [communication style]
Example: Code Assistant
You are a senior full-stack developer. Your task is to help
write production-quality code.

Rules:
1. Always use TypeScript with strict mode
2. Include error handling for all async operations
3. Add brief JSDoc comments for public functions
4. Follow the existing code patterns in the project
5. If you're unsure about a requirement, ask — don't guess

Format: Code blocks with language tags. Brief explanation before code.
Tone: Direct, technical, no filler.
Example: Data Analyst
You are a senior data analyst. Your task is to help interpret
data and write SQL queries.

Rules:
1. Always ask clarifying questions about the data schema first
2. Write queries that are readable (use CTEs over subqueries)
3. Include comments in complex queries
4. Warn about performance implications for large tables
5. Use PostgreSQL syntax by default

Format: SQL in code blocks, explanations as numbered steps.
💻 Code Generation
New Function
Write a [language] function that:
- Input: [describe input and types]
- Output: [describe output and types]
- Handles these edge cases: [list]
- Throws [ErrorType] when [condition]

Include: type annotations, error handling, brief JSDoc.
Do NOT include: tests, imports (I'll add those), logging.
Debug This
This code throws [error] when [scenario]:

[paste code]

Error: [paste error message]

Find the bug and fix it. Explain what was wrong in one sentence.
Refactor
Refactor this code. Priorities:
1. Reduce complexity (current cyclomatic complexity is too high)
2. Extract repeated logic into helper functions
3. Improve naming
4. Keep the public API unchanged

[paste code]
Code Review
Review this pull request diff. For each issue found, provide:
- Line reference
- Severity: 🔴 Bug | 🟡 Improvement | 🟢 Nitpick
- What's wrong
- Suggested fix (code)

Focus on: correctness, security, performance, readability.
Skip: formatting, import order, trivial style issues.

[paste diff]
🔍 Data Extraction
From Unstructured Text
Extract the following from this text:
- Company names (array of strings)
- Dollar amounts (array of {amount, currency, context})
- Dates (array of {date, format: "YYYY-MM-DD", context})

Return as JSON. If a field is ambiguous, include your confidence (high/medium/low).

Text: [paste text]
From HTML/Logs
Parse these server logs and extract:
1. All unique IP addresses
2. Error count by HTTP status code
3. The slowest 5 requests (URL + response time)

Format as a JSON report.

Logs:
[paste logs]
📄 Summarization
Concise Summary
Summarize this in 3 bullet points. Each bullet should be
one sentence that captures a key takeaway. Skip background
and focus on what's actionable or new.

[paste content]
Executive Summary
Write an executive summary (max 200 words) of this technical
document for a VP of Engineering. Focus on: business impact,
risk, and recommended action. No jargon.

[paste document]
Progressive Summary
Summarize at three levels:
1. **One sentence** — the core point
2. **One paragraph** — key details
3. **Detailed** (3-5 paragraphs) — full context with nuance
✍️ Creative & Writing
Blog Post
Write a technical blog post about [topic].

Audience: Mid-senior developers
Length: ~1000 words
Tone: Conversational but technical (like a good conference talk)

Structure:
1. Hook — a relatable problem or surprising fact
2. Why this matters
3. How it works (with code examples)
4. Gotchas / things I learned the hard way
5. TL;DR at the end

Do NOT: Use "In this article we will..." or "Let's dive in!"
Documentation
Write API documentation for this endpoint:
[paste code or spec]

Include:
- Description (one sentence)
- Method + URL
- Request params/body (table format)
- Response body (example JSON)
- Error responses (table: status code, description, example)
- curl example
🔬 Advanced Techniques
Self-Consistency (Multiple Answers)
Give me 3 different approaches to solve this problem.
For each approach, rate: complexity (1-5), performance (1-5),
maintainability (1-5). Then recommend which one to use and why.
Tree of Thought
Consider this problem from three expert perspectives:
1. A performance engineer
2. A security engineer
3. A UX researcher

Have each expert propose their solution, critique the other
two solutions, and then reach a consensus recommendation.
Prompt Chaining
Step 1: Analyze this codebase structure and identify the main
        modules and their dependencies. Output as a list.

[Get response]

Step 2: Based on that analysis, identify the top 3 modules
        that would benefit most from refactoring. Explain why.

[Get response]

Step 3: For the #1 module, write a detailed refactoring plan
        with specific code changes.
Reflection / Self-Critique
After you give your answer:
1. List 3 potential weaknesses in your response
2. What assumptions did you make?
3. What would you need to verify before implementing?
4. Rewrite the answer addressing those weaknesses
❌ Anti-Patterns
Anti-Pattern	Why It's Bad	Fix
Vague prompts	"Help with my code" → generic response	Add language, framework, goal, constraints
Too many instructions	Model forgets early instructions	Split into chained prompts
No examples	Model guesses the format wrong	Add 2-3 few-shot examples
Asking "can you..."	Wastes tokens — model always says yes first	Just give the instruction directly
No output format	Response format is unpredictable	Specify format explicitly
Negative-only	"Don't do X" is weaker than "Do Y instead"	State what you want positively
Wall of text prompt	Key instructions get buried	Use numbered rules, headers, line breaks
Not iterating	First response is rarely perfect	Refine in 2-3 turns
🤖 Model-Specific Tips
OpenAI (GPT-4o, o1, o3)
JSON mode: use response_format: { type: "json_object" } in API
o1/o3 reasoning models: don't say "think step by step" — they do it automatically. Keep prompts direct
System messages are strongly followed — put rules there
Temperature 0 for deterministic code generation
Anthropic (Claude)
XML tags work great: wrap sections in <context>, <instructions>, <examples>
Claude follows long system prompts very well — don't be afraid of detailed instructions
Artifacts for structured/rendered output in the web UI
Prefill technique: start Claude's response to steer output format
Google (Gemini)
Long context: Gemini handles very long inputs (1M+ tokens) — great for full codebase analysis
Grounding: can search the web in real-time for current info
Multimodal: strong at image + text understanding together
Open Source (Llama, Mistral, etc.)
Keep prompts simpler — smaller models handle complex multi-part prompts worse
Few-shot is critical — more examples = much better results
System prompts vary — check model card for recommended prompt template
Temperature matters more — smaller models are more sensitive to temp settings
Related Cheat Sheets
Git Cheat Sheet
Docker Cheat Sheet
SQL JOINs Cheat Sheet
Regex Cheat Sheet
Linux One-Liners
LangChain vs LlamaIndex
Claude Code vs GitHub Copilot CLI
Contributing
Know a technique that should be here? See CONTRIBUTING.md.

License
MIT

Last updated: April 2026 | Works with ChatGPT, Claude, Gemini, Llama, and Mistral


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

























